---
title: "The Boss and Me"
author: "Joe Scarborough"
source: "Parade"
date: "2014-06-28"
category: "Commentary"
---

Thirty years ago this month, Bruce Springsteen released his seminal album "Born in the U.S.A." Joe Scarbrough remembers the summer of '84— and the song that pitted his political idol against his musical hero.

On the 30th anniversary of the release of Bruce Springsteen's Born in the U.S.A.., let's kick off this appreciation of his seminal album by, well, trashing some of it. In June 1984, as my friends and I watched the Boss cavort in a cheesy video with a then unknown Courteney Cox on MTV, we were aghast. In the '70s we'd fallen in love with Bruce's gritty rock anthems. I was a songwriter, too, back then; Born to Run had blown me away. So "Dancing in the Dark", the Boss's slick new single, seemed like a sellout. We called it "Disco in the Dark."

But the best music demands time to get its hooks, and message, into you. I spent the first part of the summer of '84 locked in my bedroom recording new songs, trying to bring the Boss's influence into my music; then I drove across America with my friends on a seemingly endless road trip, listening to his new album. By the time we got my family's station wagon from Florida to L.A., then wound our way up the California coast, it had worked its way into our hearts.

The Boss was displaying a songwriting finesse few other rock musicians could match. Consider "No Surrender", a last-minute addition to the album that showed Bruce at his joyous best. "I'm on Fire" still transports me to a sweltering July 4th fireworks show somewhere on the Gulf Coast. We spent many a late night that summer racing through sleepy coastal towns, shouting the words to "Darlington County." Those were our glory days, and Born in the U.S.A. was our summer soundtrack.

Seven Billboard Top 10 singles came out of that album, but it was more than a hit factory. Bruce's seventh studio effort was also a requiem for the American dream, a working-class hero's love song to folks busted and bruised by Vietnam, heartbreak, and the passage of time.

Like the Eagles' Hotel California in the '70s and Nirvana's Nevermind in the '90s, Born in the U.S.A. defined and was defined by the decade of its release.

In June 1984, the Reagan Revolution was in full force. Reagan was running for a second term using the campaign slogan "It's Morning in America", a promise to voters that good times lay ahead. That idyllic patriotism was probably disorienting for Bruce, who wrote music that chronicled the underside of the American experience. Still, whether he liked it or not, many of the young concertgoers who idolized him also voted for our conservative president.

"Born in the U.S.A." was the song of the summer in '84, so it wasn't a surprise when Reagan's reelection team tried to trade on its popularity. In a stump speech in New Jersey, Reagan said Bruce's lyrics held "a message of hope", a reading that was embarrassingly off. "Born in the U.S.A." was in fact an antiwar protest song. Reagan's mistake didn't hurt him—he went on to win in a historic landslide. But the flap made presidential history.

Even if Springsteen rejected Reagan's sunny patriotism, his album oozed Stars and Stripes, from the title track down to the iconic Annie Leibovitz photo on the cover. It was like tipping a hat to Reagan's America with one hand and thumbing a nose at it with the other. And despite their dark themes, the songs were infectious. Tapping your foot to the thumping drumbeat in "Born in the U.S.A.", singing along to the chorus, you felt good. Bruce's heroes may have been beaten down, but you got the feeling the Boss wasn't counting them out.

They were proud, and above all, tough.

Three decades later, as the rich keep getting richer, the poor keep getting poorer, and the middle class keep feeling the squeeze of changes that seem beyond their control, Bruce's words feel as relevant as ever. My friends and I may have gagged over "Dancing in the Dark", but we loved the rest of that album. It spoke to everyone, from postmen to presidents, in ways no other album could.

And it still does.
