---
title: "Springsteen's Fascinating And Revelatory 'Promise'"
author: "Pete Chianca"
source: "The Lincoln Journal"
date: "2010-11-15"
category: "Album Review"
---

Well, with "The Promise", it's official: If you want a sanctioned release of raw, unexpurgated Bruce Springsteen outtakes and alternate versions, you'll have to pry it from his cold, dead hands. Unlike Billy Joel, who can be heard yelling out chord changes on his "My Lives" set, or even Bob Dylan, whose unfinished "She's Your Lover Now" is a highlight of his "Bootleg Series Vol.

1", Springsteen is far too much of a perfectionist for such antics.

"The Promise", available as a 2-CD or 3-LP set or as part of a mammoth boxed set of CDs and videos, is being billed as the lost tracks from the sessions for Springsteen's 1978 masterpiece, "Darkness on the Edge of Town." But what it really contains is a re-imagining of those unfinished and discarded songs, filtered through decades of time and experience, and completed — in some cases with newly recorded vocals — in a way that reflects both Springsteen's original vision and where he's come since.

If that sounds like cheating to you, you're probably the type of Springsteen fan who already has some of these songs on original vinyl bootlegs you bought off the back of a truck in the early '80s. You may want to stick with those.

For the rest of us, "The Promise" is a welcome addition to the Springsteen canon, always riveting and, at times, revelatory.

Maybe it's because we're so familiar with the bleak classics that make up "Darkness", but it's the earlier versions of those songs that are actually the album's weak spot. A "rock" version of "Racing in the Street" lacks the final version's tragic majesty, and compared to the breakneck assault of "Candy's Room", "Candy's Boy" is positively sleepy. The exception is "Come On (Let's Go Tonight)", which is not as lean and striking as the song it would become, "Factory", but shares that track's sense of desperate resignation.

Other songs we may already know from other artists' versions, like "Fire""Because the Night" and "Rendezvous", also seem like steps backward in comparison to Springsteen's subsequent live versions. But it's the "new" material that really makes this collection, a good 15 songs that perfectly capture the artist's influences and offer a telling glimpse at his creative process.

Part of the enjoyment involves spotting the bits and pieces that eventually made their way into other songs (hey, "Spanish Eyes" has the opening verse of "I'm On Fire"!). But all of these tracks hold their own individual pleasures.

"Gotta Get That Feeling" is a nostalgic girl-group romp that couldn't have sounded more out of place in the disco era, and on "Ain't Good Enough For You", whose melody would eventually find its way into "This Little Girl" for Gary U.S. Bonds, Springsteen is at his most playful, even as he sings about a doomed relationship — he could be the narrator of "I'm Goin' Down" before he's completely given up.

Song after song is fascinating, first in style — besides '60s soul, there's the Orbison-esque pop that Springsteen would return to on last year's "Working on a Dream", and even Latin influences, like on the mariachi-tinged "The Brokenhearted." But they also resonate lyrically, with songs like "Outside Looking In" and "Wrong Side of the Street" reflecting the sense of isolation that would eventually envelop the final version of "Darkness."

That said, it's striking how unlike the rest of "Darkness" most of these tracks are, often light and jaunty where that album is bleak and driving — "Talk To Me", eventually recorded almost identically by Southside Johnny and the Asbury Jukes (whose debt to Springsteen's late-'70s style was never more apparent) is downright house-party energetic.

The exception of course is the title track, "The Promise", a tale of dead ends and broken dreams that some say reflected Springsteen's frustration with the legal battle that kept him out of the studio after his breakthrough "Born to Run", or with the shallow nature of fame itself, or both. A sparse 1999 version sounded like a lament, but this recording, with full orchestration, would have fit in perfectly with the album's sound, not to mention its theme of acquiescence giving way to indignation.

As for Springsteen's tinkering with the original tracks, it doesn't feel like an attempt to put one over on us; instead, it informs these songs with both the influences of his past and the knowledge and context of his present work.

The result on a song like "Save My Love", recorded in its entirety this year, is a stirring addition to Springsteen's catalogue that fits perfectly with his most recent output even as it reflects his songwriting of decades past.

I'd argue that the one thing "The Promise" does best, though, is justify Springsteen's judgment. These are a terrific batch of songs, and thrilling in the context of his career as a whole — but they don't necessarily make up the Great Lost Springsteen Album that some people (including Columbia's marketing department) may want it to be.

Had this collection been released, say, in 1977 as the follow-up to "Born to Run", it would have made a fine album, but without the stark focus that eventually provided the backbone for "Darkness on the Edge of Town." "The Promise" shows that Springsteen made the right choices — and that "Darkness" was worth waiting for.
