---
title: "Some random quotes"
author: "Various"
source: "Various"
date: "Various"
category: "Other"
---

From Bruce -

At this point, I don't need my records to be Number One or sell as many as this person or that person. That's not fundamentally important — I don't believe that sustains you.

In the third grade a nun stuffed me in a garbage can under her desk because she said that's where I belonged.

There ain't a note that I play on stage that can't be traced back directly to my mother and father.

The first day I can remember looking into a mirror and being able to stand what I saw was the day I had a guitar in my hand.

You ride in a limousine the first time, it's a big thrill but after that it's just a stupid car.

But then I go through long periods where I don't listen to things, usually when I'm working. In between the records and in between the writing I suck up books and music and movies and anything I can find.

If they had told me I was the janitor and would have to mop up and clean the toilets after the show in order to play, I probably would have done it.

Yeah, I had gay friends. The first thing I realized was that everybody's different, and it becomes obvious that all of the gay stereotypes are ridiculous.

I think that is what film and art and music do; they can work as a map of sorts for your feelings.

I was always concerned with writing to my age at a particular moment. That was the way I would keep faith with the audience that supported me as I went along.

In the early years, I found a voice that was my voice and also partly my father's voice. But isn't that what you always do? Why do kids at 5 years old go into the closet and put their daddy's shoes on? Hey, my kids do it.

The best music, you can seek some shelter in it momentarily, but it's essentially there to provide you something to face the world with.

This music is forever for me. It's the stage thing, that rush moment that you live for. It never lasts, but that's what you live for.

I'm a synthesist. I'm always making music. And I make a lot of different kinds of music all the time. Some of it gets finished and some of it doesn't.

I can sing very comfortably from my vantage point because a lot of the music was about a loss of innocence, there's innocence contained in you but there's also innocence in the process of being lost.

Certainly tolerance and acceptance were at the forefront of my music.

I always wanted my music to influence the life you were living emotionally - with your family, your lover, your wife, and, at a certain point, with your children.

It's a sad man my friend who's livin' in his own skin and can't stand the company.

In the past, some of the songs that were the most fun, and the most entertaining and rocking, fell by the wayside because I was concerned with what I was going to say and how I was going to say it.

I like narrative storytelling as being part of a tradition, a folk tradition.

The best music is essentially there to provide you something to face the world with.

Your spoken voice is a part of it - not a big part of it, but it's something.

It puts people at ease, and once again kind of reaches out and makes a bridge for what's otherwise difficult music.

I tend to be a subscriber to the idea that you have everything you need by the time you're 12 years old to do interesting writing for most of the rest of your life - certainly by the time you're 18.

Plus, you know, when I was young, there was a lot of respect for clowning in rock music - look at Little Richard. It was a part of the whole thing, and I always also believed that it released the audience.

From the beginning, I imagined I would have a long work life.

I have my ideas, I have my music and I also just enjoy showing off, so that's a big part of it. Also, I like to get up onstage and behave insanely or express myself physically, and the band can get pretty silly.

In America everything's about who's number one today.

I didn't know if it would be a success-ful one, or what the stages would be, but I always saw myself as a lifetime musician and songwriter.

I do a lot of curiosity buying; I buy it if I like the album cover, I buy it if I like the name of the band, anything that sparks my imagination. I still like to go to record stores, I like to just wander around and I'll buy whatever catches my attention.

Blind faith in your leaders, or in anything, will get you killed.

It's always felt natural, because I'm generally very comfortable with people.

The only thing I can say about having this type of success is that you can get yourself in trouble because basically the world is set open for you. People will say yes to anything you ask, so it's basically down to you and what you want or need.

My only general rule was to steer away from things I played with the band over the past couple of tours. I was interested in re-shaping the Rising material for live shows, so people could hear the bare bones of that.

When I first started in rock, I had a big guy's audience for my early records.

I had a very straight image, particularly through the mid '80s.

You can go from doing something quite silly to something dead serious in the blink of an eye, and if you're making those connections with your audience then they're going to go right along with it.

Yeah, my son likes a lot of guitar bands. He gave me something the other day which was really good. He'll burn a CD for me full of things that he has, so he's a pretty good call if I want to check some of that stuff out... The other two aren't quite into that yet.

When it comes to luck, you make your own.

Your success story is a bigger story than whatever you're trying to say on stage. Success makes life easier. It doesn't make living easier.

The release date is just one day, but the record is forever.

My image had always been very heterosexual, very straight. So it was a nice experience for me, a chance to clarify my own feelings about gay and lesbian civil rights.

No, I always felt that amongst my core fans- because there was a level of popularity that I had in the mid '80s that was sort of a bump on the scale- they fundamentally understood the values that are at work in my work.

But I think that your entire life is a process of sorting out some of those early messages that you got.

The audiences are there as a result of my history with the band but also as a result of my being able to reach people with a tune.

Basically, I was pretty ostracized in my hometown. Me and a few other guys were the town freaks- and there were many occasions when we were dodging getting beaten up ourselves.

I hadn't performed by myself in a while. It feels very natural to me, and I assume people come for the very same reasons as they do when I'm with the band: to be moved, for something to happen to them. (on Bob Dylan) Bob freed your mind the way Elvis freed your body. He showed us that just because music was innately physical did not mean that it was anti- intellectual. He had the vision and the talent to make a pop record that contained the whole world. (About Elvis Presley) There have been a lot of tough guys. There have been pretenders. And there have been contenders. But there is only one King. (About Elvis Presley) He was as big as the whole country itself, as big as the whole dream. He just embodied the essence of it and he was in mortal combat with the thing. Nothing will ever take the place of that guy. (During his Oscar acceptance speech): Thanks for inviting me to your party. (imdb)

When it comes to luck, you make your own.

Until I realized that rock music was my connection to the rest of the human race, I felt like I was dying, for some reason, and I didn't know why.

**Quotes of others about Bruce Springsteen**

Last Thursday, at the Harvard Square theatre, I saw my rock'n'roll past flash before my eyes. And I saw something else: I saw rock and roll future and its name is Bruce Springsteen. And on a night when I needed to feel young, he made me feel like I was hearing music for the very first time.

Jon Landau, The Real Paper (1974)

The first time I saw Bruce he was opening up for Jethro Tull, before he had a record deal. I went to see Bruce because I was singing in that area with different bands and I wanted to get in a good rock band and he had the best rock band.

Patti Scialfa

In all my years in this business he is the only person I've met who cares absolutely nothing about money.

John A. Hammond

When Bruce Springsteen sings on his new album that's not 'fun', that's fucking triumph, man.

Pete Townshend on Darkness.

At every date he goes out and sits in every section of the hall to listen to the sound. And if it isn't right, even in the last row, I hear about it and we make changes. I mean every date too.

Bruce Jackson, sound engineer

I will always desire to play with Bruce Springsteen. He's the most inspirational, most dedicated, most committed and most focused artist I've ever seen. I like to be around people like that.

Max Weinberg

I think he's a great guitarist, a great musician and an excellent keyboard player — which most people don't know. But he knows what sets him apart from everybody is that he's a brilliant writer. Part of that is having a vision to put it across onstage as a performer, too.

Nils Lofgren

He's so good, you really want to hit him now and again. He'd come to rehearsal and he'd write five songs in a day, and he'd do that all the time, whenever he felt like it.

Steven van Zandt

Bruce was writing five or ten songs a week. He would say, "I'm gonna go home tonight and write a great song", and he did. He was the Boss then, and he's the Boss now.

Steven van Zandt

I'd heard The Bruce Springsteen Band was nearby at a club called The Student Prince. A rainy, windy night it was, and when I opened the door the whole thing flew off its hinges and blew away down the street. The band were on- stage, but staring at me framed in the doorway. And maybe that did make Bruce a little nervous because I just said, "I want to play with your band", and he said, "Sure, you do anything you want."

Clarence Clemons

There'll be no oiling up with this band. The oil has been there for years and it only gets better.

Clarence Clemons

He's older and wiser but he never strays from his basic values. He cares as much, more, about the losers than the winners. He's so unlike everything you think a real successful rock star would be.

Roy Bittan

The label of liberalism is hardly a sentence to public igominy: otherwise Bruce Springsteen would still be rehabilitating used Cadillacs in Asbury Park and Jane Fonda, for all we know, would be just another overweight housewife.

Barbara Ehrenreich - Mother Jones (1986)

I couldn't believe how happy his music made me and how good it was. He's a gift, and I didn't know. I mean, I knew 'Born in the USA' and 'Glory Days'but I didn't know that he covered so much ground, and there was something in his music that touched what I was going through, the process of falling back in love with my America.

The Killers frontman Brandon Flowers

The reason I'm running for president is because I can't be Bruce Springsteen.

President Barack Obama

Whenever I see Bruce Springsteen do anything, he empties the tank. Every time.

And the beautiful thing about this man is he empties that tank for his family, he empties that tank for his art, he empties that tank for his audience, and he empties it for his country. And we, on the receiving end of that beautiful gift, are ourselves rejuvenated, if not, redeemed.

Jon Stewart
