---
title: "The River album review"
author: "Steve Reynolds"
source: "The Heights"
date: "1980-10-17"
category: "Album Review"
---

At this point I have more respect for Van Halen than Bruce Springsteen. They do what they do (yes, it is raunch), but at least it's not Music to be Prayed to. David Roth says he's not trying to make a heavy artistic statement, and he doesn't. He goes on to claim that rock'n'rolls toto makes no artistic statement. While this last may or may not be true, it is certainly true of Bruce Springsteen's music. Whatever he might once have had to say worth listening to is behind him, and all he can do now is produce dramatic pedants about cars, while "holy blood" is drunk in the back alleys by noble mechanics and pool hustlers who rob liquor stores on the side. There are two main aspects of the Springsteen myth, and with any luck I'll destroy them both forever right now. First there's this grease about Relevance. Relevance? He rewrites standard 1950's song structures, and dresses them up with sentimental pinstriping: Johnny's face looks like a Blade/ He's gotta get That Girl/Gotta get her away/From That Guy (Her father, or another lover) Before the cops get him/ And if he dooesn't win her, he might as well drive the old camaro right off the boardwalk, And like that. Cars careen through Neon Nights, the cosmos are invoked, and it's all supposed to be so important.After all, to this man a Hurst on the floor is a religious artifact. The River's subjects are, inevitably, faceless ghosts of Pop cliches he created. All doubt is removed- the hints of staleness in Darkness on the Edge of Town are full-gore mold now, and it's painfully obvious that his ideas since the Time/Newsweek days haven't changed half as much as we're all supposed to think. For charity's sake I'll dispense with comments about individual tracks, as I fear I've already offended you legions of Brucejuicing Millah gulpers who take His lyric sheets almost as seriously as Your resumes. Not to mention all those screaming shrews in pink corduroy and ribbons, who park the skin machine right under the Darkness poster (sensitive setting at the ready). Suffice to say, if he were so god-awful talented and poignant, he'd be taking more chances with the sacred E-Street sound. Hell, he doesn't even take any chances with packaging (yes, fans, there's a dozen-odd pictures of Pacinosteen included here). Face it kids, this guy is a timid geek with nothing to say, and the only thing relevant about him is his market value to CBS execs. The problem with all this is that the poor bastard doesn't even know he's nowhere. Remember, he lives in a place that wants to take one of his running-in-the-night-from-Mom-and- Dad's-curfew ditties and make it the state song. Officially. And he's constantly told by NY press and its Dinosaurbreathed cousin, radio, that he is God. Well, Lisa, this may be hard for you to take, but the fact is, he's finally started to believe it. Which brings us to the second part of the Boss- Myth I'd like to destroy: His Devotion To The Fans. Please, please, please.

Let it be known from here to eternity that Bruce Springsteen is now, was always, and will always be, devoted solely to Bruce Springsteen. His "painstaking" (the word seems to belong to him now) care in the studio, his marathon shows complete with multiple encores and Asbury Park story-telling, are only eveidence of this, albeit in a perverse way. You see, consideration of audience is one thing-masturbation with it is another. The endless hours, the endless "one more time" rave-ups, are done to get Bruce exactly what he has-mass adulation and fanfare. In the end, Springsteen's time, his songs, and his concerts, are only offered to re-inforce his image in his own eyes. What those eyes would see, if they were open, is the tinsel lounge-act of rock and roll. After all, given the similarity of their sentiments, does it really matter if the rehearsed stage patter is Steve and Clarence, or Steve and Edie?

The quaintness and seeming naivete of earlier Springsteen ("I'm only doing it to have fun and give the kids a good show.") does not wear well on a public figure with the megastar status he so obviously courts. It's not "fun" to be in the studio for 93 straight hours rewriting one arrangement; nor does anyone do such for some abstract notion of "the kids." No, this effort is for someone with a large ego, someone afraid to risk his position in the world.
