---
title: "The Bridge Concert"
author: "Charles R. Cross"
source: "Backstreets Magazine"
date: "1987-12-01"
category: "Concert Review"
---

**Backstreets Magazine, Winter 1987 edition.**

_With one brilliant performance, Bruce Springsteen takes his music back as his own and finds a path out of the darkness...BY CHARLES R. CROSS_

"THIS A SONG ABOUT A SNAKE THAT COMES AROUND TO EAT ITS TAIL."

And with that, Bruce Springsteen raised his guitar to an angle more associated with Flamenco guitar playing, and ripped into the most intimate and personal performance in the last decade of his career. As he sang the tune — sounding for all the world like Leadbelly — the words were familiar but the message was brand new: "I was born down in a dead man's town." With one deft stroke, with one moan of his voice on the chorus, Bruce Springsteen was able to diffuse two years of co-option by the Rambo­brains of the world, by the Chrysler ads, by the marketing geniuses, all of whom had taken his song away from him. And with one line, he reclaimed it, made it his own again and spit it out with all the fire it was born with.

"Born in the USA" was the highlight of a set of highlights, on a night of highlights in the crisp Bay air. The scene was the Shoreline Amphitheatre, October 13, at The Bridge Benefit, a night of all acoustic music by the likes of Neil Young, Torn Petty, Nils Lofgren, Don Henley and Bruce Springsteen.

In the past year we've seen megastar benefits of all sorts but this was the first one Springsteen chose to do. Unlike most benefits, this one was low key.

The organizers intentionally tried to minimize the publicity. There was only one ad in a San Francisco newspaper for tickets and almost no national press in advance. Still, just the mention of a Bruce Springsteen show of any sort, brought in over two million requests for the 17,000 seats available. A lottery system was used to determine who got seats — most people simply got their requests back, stamped "Sorry, Concert Sold Out."

Those who got in saw a real treat. The show opened with Neil Young doing "Comes a Time" and "Heart of Gold", solo with guitar. Then Young looked over to the left and said, "Fd like to bring out my friend Bruce to help me do a song. You too Nils." And out came Bruce and Nils, the crowd went nuts and the trio played "Helpless." Lofgren has been a long-time friend and bandmember with both Springsteen and Young and he introduced the two while both were touring Australia. Springsteen then joined Young on stage in Oz for a brief but rocking set. The Mountain View benefit was the quiet, acoustic side to the pairing. Springsteen's contribution was just in rhythm guitar and background vocals but it was clear hè knew the song and hè obviously enjoyed playing with Neil.

Then the E Street boys left the stage and Young pulled out another, perhaps even bigger surprise— Stephen Stills, Graham Nash and David Crosby. Crosby was fresh out of jail and looked healthier than he did a year ago, though he's now bigger than a house. The quartet had not played a full set together since the early 70s and their performance on such tunes as "Only Love Can Break Your Heart" and "Ohio" were stunning — a reminder that this was once a supergroup.

Young played for a total of 30 minutes (each performer was slated for only 30 minutes) and gave way to Nils. Lofgren's set was the most personal and introspective of the evening. He did a heartfelt version of "Keith Don't Go"

and a beautiful "Wonderland." But the biggest applause was reserved for a song he introduced as "by my friend Bruce. Bruce Springsteen that is." He didn't need to explain what Bruce as he broke into "Man at the Top", an unreleased Springsteen tune that Nils has taken a fondness for.

Next out was Don Henley fronting a four-piece acoustic band that included Timothy Schmidt and J. D. Souther. They did a great "Boys of Summer" and reprised several Eagles' hits, closing with a mournful version of "Desperado"sort of the California version of "Racing in the Street."

Tom Petty was next and his set was the most disappointing. Though Petty's pop tunes sound great on the radio, songs like "American Girl" when done acousticaily had littie impact and thus served to highlight how much Petty depends on those Roger McGuinn-style-guitar riffs to fuel his songs. Petty closed with "Twist and Shout", a song that's hard to critically analyze since in comparison to Springsteen's version it wasn't even in the same ballpark (in fact a recent solo Richard Thompson "Twist and Shout" performance may be the definitive version of this Standard).

Robin Williams then came on and did a hilarious 20 minute set, including his now famous Elmer-Fudd-does-Bruce-Springsteen­doing-"Fire." The rest of his stuff was genius—Williams at this point in time, boosted by a "60 Minutes"

appearance and on a cross-country tour, is, as they say in the comedy business, hotter than a pistol.

But hotter than that was the next man to come on stage. For his first song he walked out alone, no guitar in hand, pointed at the crowd and said — "Yesterday I went shopping buddy down to the mail" His arms were at his side poised like a gunfighter, and to emphasize each verse he'd point with his finger and stomp his boots. It was one of the few acappella versions of anything he'd ever done in his career and it had all the power of a freight train. Critics have long talked about Bruce's "Pink Cadillac" rant as being mirrored after gospel preachers but his "You Can Look" was the ultimate in Boss preaching — Pat Robertsen look out. It was clear from the choice of the opening selection, and from the style of its performance, that this was not going to be the Bruce Springsteen show everyone had expected (three Nebraska tunes and an acoustic "Promised Land" took the smart money before the show).

And when Bruce grabbed his guitar and broke into his masterful version of "Born in the USA", it was clear he had broken all the rules and that for this show he was starting all over again, building these songs up from the simple melodies and lyrics they started as, creating the characters all again, giving them life, breath and stance. There was a hushed silence in the crowd after the song—it wasn't clear if everyone had fainted, died and gone to heaven or if the shock of hearing this song like this for the first time was just too much for people. One of the real highlights of the evening was the politeness of the crowd — the idiots with the headbands had stayed home. Here was a crowd with an appreciation for the tradition that rock 'n' roll began with — imagine if Springsteen's Nebraska material had been given this respect throughout the Born in the USA tour.

Bruce must have felt naked on stage alone because he then called out Danny Federici, wearing an accordian, and Nils, with an acoustic guitar, and the trio formed an abbreviated E Street Band (sort of the E Street Jug Band minus the jug). Bruce jokingly called out "Big Man, where are you?" But the joke ended when the trio poured into "Seeds. "Seeds" is the story of the oil depression's effect on the modern day Okies of Houston. Springsteen performed it frequentiy on the stadium jaunt and it was one of the singular high points of those shows. But its impact here was even greatened — slowed down, the lyrics were crystal clear and Springsteen's deep, dark voice imitating the sound of the dead man's cough was haunting.

Next up was the story of how Bruce got pulled over by the state trooper when he didn't have ED. "So I give him my name", Bruce said. "And he said 'Are you that rock 'n' roll singer?' And I said 'Yeah, that's me.' And he said 'I got all your records. You did that "Born to Run" song.' And I said 'Yeah, that's me, I'm the one.' And he said 'We'll son, you're in a lot of trouble.'"It was the classic story, used on the 1985 tour to introduce "Open All Night" But this time, from out of nowhere, came "Darlington County." Like "Born in the USA" before it, the melody was completely reworked, though the lyrics remained the same. The melody was wonderful—Danny's accordian added the hokey sort of sound the song needed.

Then came one of the songs everyone had expected: "Mansion on the Hill." Bruce introduced it with the story of how his father always had shown him the mansion and how he always thought it was so distant and unreachable. It was a beautiful version of the song — different from the 1984-85 versions only in context The sound was fabulous for the entire show but it was most evident on this tune. Whereas the 1984-85 tour's acoustic stuff was played through monster speakers set up for rock 'n' roll, everything about this situation—including the audience—was tailored to acoustic music.

Even without electricity, Bruce proved he could rock. Somebody yelled out "rock 'n' roll" and Bruce said, "I can't get too excited here." He broke a string and to fill time he asked Danny to entertain the crowd. So Danny started up "Satin Doll" on the accordian. It was one of the warmest moments in a Springsteen show in years — harkening back to 1973 when Bruce and Danny, complete with accordian, would do radio interviews and play a few songs acoustically.

When the guitar was fixed, Bruce joked about "Frankie Yankovic junior", and started another big surprise, "Fire." But rather than Elmer Fudd, this time it was Bruce Springsteen trying to do his sexiest song sitting down while playing guitar ("I gotta stay calm", he kept saying to himself). For emphasis he tapped his boots and rose up on his chair, trying at once to keep himself under control and at the same time communicate the great adolescent lust apparent in this song. At the point usually reserved for the face off with the Big Man, Bruce repeated "I just can't, I just can't, I just can't STAND MYSELF" and the effect was one of the most chilling things he'd done in years — not unlike the prolonged "I'd drive" sequence in "Backstreete/Sad Eyes" back in 1978.

Next up was "Dancing in the Dark", once again done with a different melody.

Rather than the show-off, flip tone of the video production, this time around, with Bruce alone without any girl, it had a much sweeter and wanting tone — sort of like a Cyrano de Bergerac poem, sung out to a girl on a balcony.

Then came "Glory Days", which, though done acoustically, mirrored the 1984-85 version in all other respects. Much better was the next song, which Bruce dedicated to Neil and Peggy Young (the entire event was organized by Peggy Young) the quintiessential version of "Follow that Dream." It had the beauty of everything that was good about Elvis Presley all rolled up into three minutes. Bruce's voice—virgin fresh, lacking that mid-tour hoarseness—never sounded better in his life. Ella Fitzergerald may break glass but Bruce's voice on "Follow That Dream" could break hearts.

Springsteen had already played for well over an hour, more than any two of the other performers combined. But it was his crowd and to close he pulled out Crosby, Stills, Nash and Young to add background vocals on a super-version of "Hungry Heart."

Finally, everyone came out on stage — Petty, Henley, Williams, the whole shebang. They broke into "Teach Your Children" and though it was the only musical point of the evening that lacked substance, there was a level of excitement in seeing all these superstars united, on one stage. Particularly striking was the image of Bruce Springsteen sharing a microphone with David Crosby — the very best role model in rock 'n' role right next to one of the worst But Springsteen's, and the crowd's, affection towards Crosby seemed sincere—it was a sign of the forgiveness that only a form as transcendental as rock 'n' roll can dish up.

And as Bruce Springsteen shows go, it was one of the most exuberant and genuine performances in years, and proof enough that despite how knocked out of whack everything has gotten these past few years, Bruce Springsteen is still a performer who takes risks. And it was clear from the Mountain View show that the benefit of those risks go both directions — he has rarely looked happier on stage. He gave the distinct impression that his music was giving something back to him. Seeing Springsteen after the show, as ebullient and blissful as he has ever looked, it would come as no surprise to hear that Bruce planned to take his solo show on the road, to small halls, to small towns — to places where the battles he sings about are still won and lost.

CHARLES CROSS
