---
title: "From the Quiet of a Bedroom, Raw Songs of America"
author: "Anthony DeCurtis"
source: "The New York Times"
date: "2000-12-31"
category: "Commentary"
---

I WANTED to let the listener hear the characters think, to get inside their heads, so you could hear and feel their thoughts, their choices", Bruce Springsteen has written about his 1982 album "Nebraska", a chilling portrait of an America that has spun off its moral compass. "I wanted the music to feel like a waking dream and the record to move like poetry. I wanted the blood on it to feel destined and fateful."

Those lofty ambitions would seem to run counter to the confession Mr. Springsteen made about "Highway Patrolman", one of the most powerful moments on "Nebraska", in a note to his manager during the album's earliest stages. The song is "not really finished", he said, but "about as good as I can get it at the time."

Mr. Springsteen recorded the songs for "Nebraska" in his bedroom, using a four-track tape machine. He assumed that those versions were merely demos, that he would soon flesh the songs out in a proper studio with his band. When he tried to do that, he ended up feeling that he was losing the essence of his original vision. He then recorded versions of the songs solo in a studio, and the results were similarly sterile. So 10 of the performances on Mr. Springsteen's bedroom tape, which he had carried around in his pocket for months, became "Nebraska", and the album's quality of being "not really finished" became part of its mythology, a crucial reason why it holds such a revered place in the lore of popular music.

Like "Pink Moon", the painfully spare album released in 1972 by the doomstruck English folk singer Nick Drake -- and recently revived, with perfect postmodern irony, by the use of its title track in a Volkswagen ad -- "Nebraska" proves several of the most staunchly held tenets of the rock 'n' roll faith: the first impulse is the best; the right feel trumps musical perfection; production, with its perceived lack of spontaneity and its emphasis on craft, crushes the individual voice and is the enemy of art.

Consisting largely of Mr. Springsteen's performing solo on acoustic guitar, "Nebraska", strictly speaking, is hardly rock 'n' roll. But its risk-taking rawness -- as well as its sympathetic but unforgiving depiction, in Mr. Springsteen's words, of "characters out on the edge", traveling "from nowhere to nowhere" -- is driven by the rebellion at the heart of that music.

It is a rebellion that, for Mr. Springsteen at the time, had taken on a political cast. He has called "Nebraska" his most personal album, but it also indicts the smug certainties of the then ascendent Reagan era. In a couple of years, Mr. Springsteen would square off directly with Mr. Reagan when the president spoke approvingly of "Born in the U.S.A.", a song originally written for "Nebraska", as endorsing his own vision of America.

"The president was mentioning my name the other day, and I kind of got to wondering what his favorite album might have been", Mr. Springsteen told an audience in Pittsburgh. "I don't think it was the 'Nebraska' album." He then played a song from "Nebraska" called "Johnny 99", about an unemployed man who commits a murder. "Now, judge, I got debts no honest man could pay", Mr. Springsteen sang. "The bank was holdin' my mortgage and they was takin' my house away/ Now I ain't sayin' that makes me an innocent man/ But it was more 'n' all this that put that gun in my hand."

So the release on election day of "Badlands: A Tribute to Bruce Springsteen's 'Nebraska' " (SPCD 525) is a heartfelt endorsement of that rebellious spirit in a time dominated by political apathy, pop slickness and marketing might. As a form, the tribute album has proved, almost by definition, to be a mixed bag, and "Badlands", which takes its name from the Terrence Malick film that inspired the album's title track, is no different. The biggest disappointment comes right at the top, a soporific version of the title song served up by Chrissie Hynde and Adam Seymour of the Pretenders. In Springsteen's hands, the tale of Charles Starkweather and Caril Fugate's murder spree in the 1950's becomes emblematic of a corrosive spiritual exhaustion summed up in a line meant to evoke the tormented ramblings of the Misfit, the murderous main character in "A Good Man Is Hard to Find" by Flannery O'Connor: "There's just a meanness in this world." Ms. Hynde and Mr. Seymour stagger through a glacially slow meditation on "Nebraska" without displaying any comprehension of its violent depths.

The artists who fare best on "Badlands" do so by upsetting the listener's expectations as radically as Mr. Springsteen did the first time around. For example, Hank Williams III, the grandson of the country music legend, transforms the brooding "Atlantic City" into a honky-tonk stomp, suffusing it with the manic desperation so prevalent elsewhere on "Nebraska." And Crooked Fingers, the latest project of Eric Bachmann, the former singer and guitarist of Archers of Loaf, deftly find the swirling, dreamlike center of "Mansion on the Hill."

Playing beautifully on acoustic slide guitar, Ben Harper sings "My Father's House", a song about the devastating psychological absence of a parent, with all the heartbroken yearning of a child seeking a connection that can never be. Most surprisingly, Deana Carter shoots a steamy erotic current through the lost-highway saga, "State Trooper." She is the country singer known for the album "Did I Shave My Legs for This?"

"Badlands" also includes versions of three songs that were on Mr. Springsteen's original cassette but never made it onto "Nebraska", the most notable of which is Damien Jurado and Rose Thomas's haunted reading of the relatively obscure ballad "Wages of Sin."

In both its stripped-down sound and its themes of guilt, suffering and redemption, "Nebraska" is Mr. Springsteen's most rigorously focused album, if one of his least commercially successful. It was a bold aesthetic move by a man who had only recently become a superstar. With performances by 13 artists, "Badlands" could never aspire to that kind of conceptual unity. But, like "Nebraska" itself, its implications reach beyond the pop marketplace. Complacency can destroy you, these songs whisper, because "there's just a meanness in this world." It's a message of existential urgency that has lost none of its currency and isn't likely to any time soon.
