---
title: "Bruce Springsteen Evolves Into A Figure Of Rock Expression"
author: "John Rockwell"
source: "The New York Times"
date: "1974-07-16"
category: "Commentary"
---

A year and a half ago, when Bruce Springsteen emerged as the latest in the line of "new Bob Dylans", he impressed mostly for the manic energy of his speedy strings of words and metaphors. But times have changed, and Mr. Springsteen has evolved into one of the most exciting young figures in rock music. Anybody interested in where pop is going and who missed him at the Bottom Line this past weekend or who fails to hear him at the Schaefer Festival in Central Park on Aug. 3 is making a big mistake.

Like so many of the younger rock singer — song writers, Mr. Springsteen is quite deliberately self‐conscious in his approach both to rock and his themes of alienation and teen age surrealist fantasy. At his second two‐hour show Fridays night, he emerged looking like a Sha‐Na‐Na reject, complete with a vaguely nineteen‐fifties hair‐do, shades and a dark T-shirt, its short sleeves rolled up to the shoulder.

**They Love to Play**

He relies less these days on his "poems", which in any case offer more energy than any special way with words, Instead, and most refreshingly, he has extended his range of musical expression. First of all, Mr. Springsteen and his five accompanying instrumentalists simply love to play. And second, his band—which has been with him from the start, except for the drummer, and which consists of Clarence Clemons on tenor sax, Dave Sancious on piano, Danny Federici on organ, Garry Tallent on bass and Ernest Carter on drums, plus Mr. Springsteen himself on lead guitar— has turned into something very special.

Despite his debts to Mr. Dylan and to Van Morrison, Mr. Springsteen is a highly original vocalist; occasionally the selfconsciousness intrudes unduly, but it seems in the process of being purged. And the band's originality—most noticeable in Mr. Clemons's saxophone solos and Mr. Sancious' vaguely Debussyan pianism —never gets in the way of good old rock 'n' roll, tight and together, yet simultaneously loose and happy. Check it out for yourself.
