---
title: "Rising Son"
author: "Gavin Martin"
source: "The London Times"
date: "2003-05-24"
category: "Commentary"
---

When Bruce Springsteen released The Rising last July, his first album of new songs with the E Street Band for 18 years, it was hailed as the return of rock’s prodigal son. Inspired largely by the the terrorist attacks against the US on September 11, 2001, The Rising is classic Springsteen, an album of people struggling to find hope amid death, horror and seemingly insurmountable odds. But on both the album and at the shows that have followed, Springsteen has been at pains not to present himself as a patriotic figurehead. America’s most responsive rock star is also its most thoughtful and single-minded.

Morality, dignity and integrity are rare in rock’n’roll, but these traits have been touchstones throughout Springsteen’s career. It is hardly surprising, therefore, that since the Eighties he has had an ambiguous relationship with his role as an all-American blue-collar rock icon.

In 1992, newly settled into his $15 million home in Beverly Hills with his wife and children, he looked back ruefully on his recent past in Lucky Town. His 1995 album The Ghost of Tom Joad was a bleak look at “the new world order” from the perspective of migrant workers, refugees and former convicts. Though out of sync with contemporary pop culture, it was perfectly in keeping with Springsteen’s long-term quest to find a common humanity.

However, unlike 1982’s Nebraska, which Springsteen’s biographer Dave Marsh contends was an album “about personal turmoil in the guise of social commentary”, Tom Joad was the work of a happily married millionaire family man. He was, however, uncertain where his future as an artist lay. “I was having a hard time locating my rock voice. I knew it didn’t want to be the voice from Born in the USA.” That song, the title track from his biggest selling album, remains the most misinterpreted of Springsteen’s career. During the 1984 US election campaign both Ronald Reagan and Walter Mondale tried and failed to appropriate the title and Springsteen’s image. Outside of his music Springsteen has traditionally been reluctant to speak out on political issues. His caution is understandable. In an interview to publicise The Rising a one-line quote — “the war in Afghanistan was handled very, very smoothly” — was hailed as a ringing endorsement of the Bush Administration’s war on terror. But when the Dixie Chicks’ recent anti-Bush comments resulted in the Texan country trio being banned from radio stations Springsteen was quick to respond. “The pressure coming from the Government and big business to enforce conformity of thought concerning the war and politics goes against everything this country is about,” he said in a statement issued on his website.

Although he made no public comment on the war in Iraq, Springsteen opened his shows during the conflict with Edwin Starr’s peace anthem War. As always with Springsteen, hope and reconciliation, rather than blame and retribution, have been the goals. Thus the show’s gospel-influenced climax Land of Hope and Dreams was prefaced by a prayer for “our sons, daughters and Iraqi civilians”. When Springsteen visited London last year he played a concert unlike any other, with more than 30 years of stage craft coming to bear on songs that explore both our darkest fears and sweetest dreams. In the post-hip-hop world it is hard to see how the traditions he draws on will thrive, but when Springsteen and the E Street Band are in full flow they have never seemed more vital or more alive.

Now back in his native New Jersey, where Born to Run is the official state rock anthem and Asbury Park has been renamed Boss Avenue, Springsteen seems comfortable to play the local rock’n’roll star. His popularity there is greater than ever, and in August he will play to 420,000 people in a series of shows at the Giants Stadium. But when local campaigners tried to persuade him to stand for the Senate last summer, Springsteen asserted his independence by quoting General Sherman: “If nominated I will not run, if elected I will not serve.”

At 53, Springsteen is undoubtedly still born to run, but there are limits to how far he is prepared to go.
