---

title: "Bruce Springsteen Talks To Ian "Molly" Meldrum 2010"
author: "Ian Meldrum"
source: "Sunday Night"
date: "2010-11-20"
category: "Interview"
---

**Bruce Springsteen:** This man right here dragged me through the longest four hours of my life. Whenever I think of you I think of pain. Wow we're on film already. I'm not ready I need to be beautified. Here we are, you dragged your arse a long way may I say, all the way up here! Thank you.

**Molly Meldrum** : It's a beautiful place.You could live anywhere in the world. Without sounding offensive, this is like the old MacDonald had a farm.

Here's this amazing farm with goats.

**Bruce Springsteen** : Does that make me old MacDonald?

**Molly Meldrum:** No, no old MacDonald had a farm.

**Bruce Springsteen** : Well there are goats out there yes there are and some chickens also. We enjoy it. I grew up ten minutes from here. The house I recorded Nebraska in is five minutes this way.

**Molly Meldrum** : The Darkness recording session was filmed three decades ago, a few miles from here ?

**Bruce Springsteen** : Yeah. We had a big box of things we didn't know what it was and in it we found all this footage from the recording of darkness on the edge of town which makes up half the picture and shows all these skinny little 27 year old kids trying to come up with their masterpiece in the studios. When I saw the documentary I went in into shock because I never dreamed that I was that skinny, that these guys were that skinny.

**Molly Meldrum** : Is it strange to look back and see yourself at that age?

**Bruce Springsteen** : I look a lot like my son so it was interesting. My sons are close, 20 and 16 and some of the scenes you're just a dead ringer for your kids you know.

**Molly Meldrum:** Some times it looks tense. And other times it's loose and carefree. It was just after the celebrated lawsuit.....

**Bruce Springsteen** : It was very rough at the time.

**Molly Meldrum** : I have always loved the title track.

**Bruce Springsteen** : Out of all the songs I' ve written- that's way, way up near the top as one of my favourites.

**Molly Meldrum:** Would it be fair to say that you didn't like becoming a rock star?

**Bruce Springsteen** : There's a lot a lot of rock stars always will be. I don't mind being that but I don't want to be just that.

**Molly Meldrum** : Did you like making videos?

**Bruce Springsteen:** I would have been fine if there were never any videos personally really I've enjoyed making them over the years it was one of the things I did over the years because it became a way to get your music exposed I wasn't driven to be a video maker. You look at the two times we had catastrophic success it was Born to Run and Born in the USA and after both of those times I kind of stopped and reflected. I wasn't so concerned with the perpetuation of hit records of what it meant to who I was, who I wanted to be and what kind of music, I wanted to make where I wanted to go.

**Molly Meldrum:** When the kids see the documentary do they say look at dad there?

**Bruce Springsteen:** They don't bother watching it. You have to respect the divine right of kids to ignore their parents that's very important. Kids don't want to go and see thousands cheering their mother and father its your worst nightmare.

**Molly Meldrum:** What advice would you give a young band today?

**Bruce Springsteen** : It's good to learn to play live. One suggestion to young musicians is to develop a flame throwing live show because that's an important connection. There isn't a night you go out on a stage of any size and you don't realise that I am a guy who plays a guitar for a living. I am a lucky guy.
