---
title: "Born In The USA Review"
author: "Charles Shaar Murray"
source: "NME"
date: "1984-08-04"
category: "Album Review"
---

IN BRUCE Springsteen's 1984, America – the original big country where dreams stay with you – has contracted; it is now a very small country indeed.

The Great American Highway which Springsteen used to celebrate so feverishly now leads nowhere at all but to another place where things are no better. He no longer proclaims that there's magic in the night: the nights are plainly as dead as the days.

From the cranked-up romanticism and defiance of Born To Run nearly ten years ago to the deadpan acoustic recital of defeats and disasters that made up 1982's Nebraska, Springsteen's chest-beating and myth-making has given way to a Reaganomic realism that is sobering rather than intoxicating.

The title tune rings like a blow or a curse: Springsteen sings the whole song like a man on the edge of his tether and Max Winberg's snare cracks like a whip the length of a city; when he plays a roll it sounds like collapsing (old) buildings.

Springsteen's protagonist is raised in a small town, gets into trouble, goes off to fight in Vietnam where his brother dies, comes home and can't find work. Dead end: "I'm ten years burning down the road/nowhere to run ain't got nowhere to go/Born in the USA/I was born in the USA..." The land of the free? Tell me about it. When he sneers: "I'm a cool rockin' daddy in the USA" you don't believe it any more than he does.

It sets the tone for the whole album. No-one spits in the face of the badlands any longer: the badlands didn't even notice. The old cast of street rats and soulful gangsters made their rebillion back in Born To Run and Darkness At The Edge Of Town and it made no damn bit of difference at all.

"Well maybe we could cut someplace of our own with these drums and these guitars", he remembers wearily in 'No Surrender', but the song – and album – has more to do with the question what do you do the morning after your final defeat?

Springsteen's characters are married, in their mid-'30s and dealing with parenthood and recession. Maybe the narrator of 'My Hometown' is The Magic Rat ten years on from 'Jungleland' abandoning his dreams of moving out and moving on, initiating his own son into the same life-style that he once swore he would escape.

There is refuge in love and the dance, but it is shortlived and hollow: the single 'Dancing In The Dark' (Springsteen's concession to nasty modern pop) is yearning but hollow: you know it won't work out. In 'Cover Me' he blends Talking Heads proto-funk with minor-key blues and some wrenching Albert King- style guitar in an affecting plea for emotional security, but ultimately Born In The USA contains no easy answers.

When one is this thoroughly caught up in the quicksand of society, there are only two escape routes: through what for want of a better term one might call mysticism or through the direct route of political action whereby you agitate, demonstrate and do everything you can think of to change the world around you and create a more life-enhancing environment. Springsteen's characters (and presumably Brucie himself) seem unprepared to take either route, which leaves them up to their necks in good ol' Amerikaka.

No-one's going to get high on fantasy or rebellion from listening to Born In The USA. There are no moments of delirious abandon here; the music is as dry and contracted as the state of mind it describes.

It is very rare to see an artist take a clearcut choice between selling his audience the same old bullshit that he knows they love, and telling them the truth even if it means letting go of stuff that sells.

By abandoning all that 'rebel triumphant' blabber'n smoke, Bruce Springsteen displays the kind of moral and artistic integrity that rock music rarely shows any more. The power of Born In The USA is less flashy and less intoxicating, but it is far more real than the power of Springsteen's early work; this is the power of an artist telling the truth.
