---
title: "NME Interview"
author: "Andrew Tyler"
source: "NME"
date: "1975-11-15"
category: "Interview"
---

BRUCE SPRINGSTEEN says he just writes down his impressions of stuff whereas here in Hollywood, Calif., there are people in from New York who believe otherwise. They tell you things like "Bruce is purity". Bruce cuts through grime in half the time. Bruce is what America has been praying for ever since Dylan fell off his motorbike and Brando got too fat to be in the motorcade any more.

And it gets harder to decide what's best to believe because the people in from New York talk a lot louder than is natural and so do outsiders with a contrary understanding of the situation, coming on like a life depended on putting down the "I have seen mankind's future and it's a short, skinny guy in a brown leather jacket" theory.

Bruce feels more than a little sick when he hears this kind of talk. His tendency, when it occurs, is to retire into a slow, agonised idiot-drawl, the relevance of which is not all that easily recognisable. But that's to his credit. Dylan, after all, never once said "Sure, I know the environment. The complexities of the human mind and things of that nature". And neither did James Dean or Brando when he was thin. It was only when Brando started whanging off in those kind of directions that his credibility was suddenly and irrevocably reduced.

No. The only way to make a legitimate claim to American folk-hero status is to reject the candidacy as preposterous. Then clam up and spit a mysterious spit. And that's precisely what Bruce Springsteen from Freehold, N.J., is doing. Or you assume that's what he's doing.

One thing's for certain, though, and that's the fundamental lack of modesty within the Springsteen camp on the subject of the attributes and infinite potential of their boy.

Jon Landau, the celebrated American rock critic who quit worrying over an intestinal disorder to co-produce Springsteen's Born To Run album says that in the "rock area" Springsteen's not only a "great artist" but also happens to be able to do "more things better than anyone else I've seen". Also he's the "best performer in the history of rock 'n' roll", with the possible exception of Elvis P., whom he nominates mainly for "sentimental" reasons.

Mike Appel offers scant contrast when he makes claims to being manager of "the greatest artist in the world today, that's all", a sentiment he punctuates by attacking the palm of his left hand with his right fist.

Appel is a curiosity even among rock and roll managers. John Hammond, the Columbia talent scout who signed Springsteen, describes him as "offensive as any man I've ever met", a reference, no doubt, to Appel's boundless and sometimes absurd urges for conflict. Mostly it's the press who get to feel Appel's pointed end and this, it turns out, is no accident.

"I like to do things with integrity", he notes, "and since the media is not set up for integrity but for their own ends, my idea of how things should be done and their idea of how things should be done, clash. So what happens is I'm the guy they focus all their hate on."

Appel and Landau's extremities are matched by virtually everyone else within the Springsteen inner circle. Peter Philbin, Columbia's New York based international press officer, can talk up his client with a heat approaching delirium and at the recent Springsteen concerts at Hollywood's Roxy was not so much the impassioned go-between as one more nut on a chair howling his brains inside out.

EVEN WITHIN his band, there's an awestruck, almost religious, regard for the man they call The Boss. Clarence Clemons, the 33-year-old saxman, sees his meeting with Springsteen as being no less than divinely-wrought:

"Bruce is the greatest person I've ever met", he says. "He's the strongest person I've ever met. When I first met him it was like in the Bible where this guy met this guy and he say 'lay down your thing and follow me' and that's exactly the way I felt, man. But I didn't. And I punish myself. And I guess God punished me 'cos I got in this car accident and I nearly got killed and shit. Anyway. He came back (from California where he'd been visiting his parents) and we got together and here we are."

No less extraordinary has been the contribution of Time and Newsweek to the ballooning Springsteen legend and the apparent ease with which Appel was able to manipulate these two indefatigable giants.

Time had previously run a piece on Springsteen in their April 1974 issue. Then a number of weeks ago Newsweek made approaches of their own and Time catching wind of the freshening scent came back for second helpings. (The renewed interest had probably been spurred on by Springsteen's dates in August at New York's Bottom Line club, out of which came the most excessive Bruce-Is-Easily-The-Greatest-Person-On-The-Planet coverage to date.) This time, Appel explained, the rules were substantially altered. The game now was "you give me a cover. I give you an interview".

"...and they have to dislike you for it", he says. "They say we're New Musical Express, we're Melody Maker, we're Newsweek, we're Time magazine and who the hell are you to tell us it has to be a cover story. But I say to you 'I'm giving you the most coveted thing I can give you. I'm giving you an interview with Bruce Springsteen. There's nothing more I can give you'."

The indefatigable two returned and the net result was that double cover splash on October 27 (Appel's birthday), the first for an entertainer since Liza Minelli's Cabaret days.

Both articles were strangely impartial considering the prominence they attached to their subject. Lots of biographical data imput, a smattering of the dourest kind of rhapsodising and – in Newsweek's case – a few microscopic insinuations that Springsteen might, after all, be the gravest kind of record business hypola which, by the laws of media cause and effect, would render themselves and Time the victims.

A few years back the pair of them would have hung majestically to one side until the Springsteen legend knocked them down, then they'd have performed the gesture of the Cover Story.

These days, even Time, and Newsweek are fearful of missing out on the very next American sensation even if it means lining up at the wrong theatre before the box office opens.

"It's crazy", says Springsteen. "It doesn't make too much sense and I don't attach too much distinction to being on the cover. It's a magazine. It goes all round the world but really...you know."

WE'RE IN a vacant room in the Sunset Marquis, Hollywood. Springsteen's eating a bowl of Rice Crispies. Already he's got on his brown leather jacket and he looks like he hasn't slept in maybe four weeks.

"It doesn't have that much to do with what I'm doing", he says. "I don't think so. The main reason I went through with it...you see one of the things I did want, I wanted 'Born To Run' to be a hit single. Not for the bucks but because I really believed m the song a whole lot and I just wanted to hear it on the radio, you know. On AM. Across the country. For me, that's where a song should be.

"And they said, well if you get your picture on Time, or sumpin', programme directors may think twice before they drop it or throw it out. So the only physical reason I was on that thing was for that reason specifically, you know. Otherwise, man, I'll probably regret it, you know."

Rolling Stone played an altogether cooler game. Still up in the air and blowing off over their Patty Hearst exclusives, their preference was to regard Springsteen as another of those East Coast phenomena, the kind that blows in and out with the frequency of the Atlantic tide.

And Playboy...Appel also tried to hustle a Playboy cover but was told that the Big Bunny would rather take it in the eye than set that kind of precedent.

AND SO it was to the Roxy in Hollywood that the Springsteen entourage came October 16 to 19 to debunk the hype, perjury and associated theories, and it was with a deal of noise and small regard for the agreed subtleties that CBS applied themselves to the task. They began with a 50 per cent stake in the opening night house and bought in from there until your average man on the street needed air and ground troop support to get into the place.

By way of consolation, a roster of Hollywood's brightest show-stoppers turned up to lend their support...a line-up that by week's end included Jack Nicholson, G. Harrison, Jackson Browne, Neil Diamond, Jackie De Shannon (backstage introduction), Carole King (backstage introduction), Joni Mitchell (left early), Cher and Greg (twice), Tom Waits (hitched from his own gig 90 miles away), Dick Carpenter ("John, a Marguerita!") Wolfman Jack (?) and Warren Beatty.

First night there was the usual pre-performance walking to and fro; the conspicious nonchalance, Hollywood hugging, shouting across tables and explanations as to the root cause and nature of the Springsteen phenomena, and by the time Bruce actually walked out on stage everyone was so relieved at not having to exhibit epic boredom any more that the house lit up with a screaming and a wailing that must have scared him half to death.

He heads straight for stage centre, which is dark, empty and almost eerie save for the screaming going on, leans his head and body against the mike stand and just to further irritate those Dylan comparisons whips out a harmonica for the opening of 'Thunder Road'.

He's got on a beaten-up leather jacket, a pair of tight blue Levis. He's small, he's skinny and his harp playing's every bit as dumb as Dylan's.

The Screen door slams Mary's dress waves Like a vision she dances across the porch...

A prelude to a number about a woeful girl waiting for her King Kong to come along and make sense out of her dreaming and Springsteen as the guy who says "what the hell, things might not be so perfect around here but let's jump in the old wagon anyway and take a ride along Thunder Road".

Hey I know it's late we can make it if we run

There's just a piano pumping away and Springsteen's knotty, out-of-tune voice...and dead still. Head bowed. Brando, in The Men, as his girl's telling him she'll love him forever even though his legs don't work any more. Actually, it's all pretty embarrassing. And with folk through the house going "whoop, yeah...you sure can make a guitar sing, Bruce", you feel kind of ominously out of sync.

Then the band comes out for "Tenth Avenue Freeze-Out', also from Born To Run, and the lights flash on and Springsteen starts whipping and winding up his body, attempting to lend the appearance of weight to what on record is a fairly inconsequential moment. Cluttered, dense lyrics. A melody and arrangement that are a patchwork of some of the more dubious R 'n' R mannerisms of the early sixties.

'Spirit In The Night' is one of his few genuinely stirring melodies, even though it leans too heavily on Van Morrison. An early song, from Greetings From Asbury Park, a period when Springsteen was caught up with the flash of the exploding metaphor...gypsy angels, mission men and a preponderance of internal rhyme and lines that get left hanging.

Crazy Janey, Wild Billy and a bunch more drive out to Greasy Lake "about a mile down on the dark side of route eighty-eight" where Janey's fingers wind up in the author's "cake". The love scene is played out in the dark with Springsteen lying prone across a line of tables that reach out to the stage. Girls rub his back as he sings "Me and Crazy Jane was making love in the dirt singing our birthday songs" Then the band and the spots light up, Springsteen jogs back to the stage and the house goes wild with delight (for Janey and her lover that night).

For the opening of the old Manfred Mann number, 'Pretty Flamingo', Springsteen delivers a rambling explanation-as-to-the-origins monologue that's half-heard, half-grunt and a pretty fine enactment of dumb barhouse literacy. The kind of punchy drool that Dean gloried in. Everyone gets to feel mean in the presence of this kind of talk.

More sordid still is the way he frames the opening to 'E Street Shuffle'. Here he tells the largely factual account of how he met up with saxman Clemons who'd been playing with a local Asbury Park R 'n' B band when a girlfriend told him he'd best go down to the Student Prince and look in on this kid Springsteen.

The way Springsteen tells it, he and his guitarist Miami Steve were shuffling through the cold and foggy night when through the smoke they see a big man coming at them. They hide in a doorway and fall to their knees as the big man approaches.

They're scared and they're cold and they're getting ready to run when Clarence holds out a hand, Springsteen reaches out to meet it. They touch. And sparks fly out on E Street.

The magic of Springsteen is right here...at the climax of this particular yarn. On the word "sparks", the stage flashes red, Springsteen leaps to a standstill and the band slams in with the kind of precision entrance that occurs only when there's an operating concensus. From now on the show's alive, more refined...a state of affairs that very nearly extends to the music itself.

'Kitty's Back', 'Jungleland' and 'Rosalita' have that foggy West Side tilt to them and although neither is a miracle of construction there's enough ongoing momentum – and in the case of 'Kitty's Back', a climactic instrumental segment – to eclipse the dubious areas.

The band, in fact, is surprisingly adept at locating Springsteen's half- concealed intentions. Excellent solos are forthcoming in both 'Rosalita' and 'Kitty's Back'...especially from pianist Roy Bitten...and only organist Danny Federici, whose tendency is to grip the high end of the board a lot longer than is attractive, is suspect here.

Just one encore tonight...a high drama mood piece with accordian and sometimes-whispered lyrics.

'Sandy's about Bruce, or someone a lot like Bruce, readying himself to quit the boardwalk life and it gives Springsteen the chance to open up on the reckless inhabitants of that whole scene. The clairvoyants, the bikers, waitresses, someone called Madame Marie, each of them shuffling back and forth from nothing to not much more.

Lyrically it's one of his most interesting pieces, since it's one of the few moments he chooses to lay bare the disillusionment he patently feels for all the shucking from pintable to roadside diner to trash can which in most of his later works he's inadvertently glorifying.

"'Born To Run'" he says, "was about New York. I was there for months. I had this girl with me and she'd just come m from Texas and she wanted to go home again and she was going nuts and we were in this room and it just went on and on. I would come home and she would say 'Are you done? Is it over? Are you finished?' And I said 'No, it ain't over, it ain't over.' I'd come home practically in tears."

"And I was sort of into that whole thing of being nowhere. But knowing that there is something someplace. It's got to be like right there. It's got to be tight somewhere."

BORN TO RUN had already been eight months in the making when Jon Landau (prev. exp. MC5's Back In The USA plus two Livingston Taylor albums) moved in on the job. With Landau around things continued to move at a deathly doze, although the further four and a half months taken to complete the package was, by contrast, an exhibition of fire and lightning.

Landau attributes the delays to Springsteen's fetish for detail: "He'd spend hours", he says, "on one line. He'd say 'hang on guys, I wanna check a line' and four hours later he'd be sitting there trying to make the most minute changes in one verse."

The pair had met April '74 in a Boston club called Charlie's where the Springsteen band were playing. In the club window was a blow-up of a review Landau had just written for the local Real Paper – an A-minus piece that dealt with Springsteen's "many imperfections" as well as his considerable potential for world domination.

It was a cold night, Landau remembers, and be found Springsteen its the back garden in a t-shirt, jumping up and down as he read the review.

Springsteen told him he'd read better but the piece was okay, and then Landau introduced himself.

The show he saw that night he describes as "astounding" although no more than "a rough draft" of what takes place these days. The pair kept in touch and a month later Landau went into print with that high voltage review that Columbia subsequently spent 50,000 dollars promoting...the "I have seen rock n roll's future and its name is Bruce Springsteen" job.

Not that CBS didn't require an amount of cattle prodding before lining up behind the Springsteen/Landau combination. Factionalism within the company was rife...due partly to the flamboyance of Appel and the intractable nature of his client and also because Springsteen was a prodigy of "disgraced" chief executive Clive Davis.

There were even reports of an alleged plot where the Springsteen myth, would be hatched solely to irritate Bob Dylan, who'd recently left CBS for a two- record deal with David Geffen's Asylum company.

Appel himself goes more than half way to conceding that such a plan might well have existed.

"When you're involved in big-time record company management", he says, "There are power plays. There's how do you bring a Bob Dylan into line, how do you bring his lawyer into line.

"His lawyer comes in and asks for the world...asks for retroactive royalties on Bob Dylan's albums. Asking outrageous sums of money. All kinds of deals. All kinds of big spending. And then when the negotiations fail, Clive Davis had left the record company and the whole world was looking at Columbia Records and everyone was taking pot shots at them. They were very nervous. Very uptight at this particular time, trying to prove themselves. Naturally they might have said, you know, in the heat of the mement, 'screw Bob Dylan, we're going to take Bruce Springsteen and use him and show that guy just where it's at.' However, that wasn't to be the case because it took us a long time to get our album together and Blood On Tracks and all that had come out ahead of us. And they did manage to get Bob back."

A suitably ironic climax to this particular episode was the request made through CBS by Time magazine for an interview with Bob Dylan on the subject of Bruce Springsteen. The request was rejected.

SPRINGSTEEN IS bewildered rather than flattered by the machinations on his behalf...the hoops he has to go through for the front pages.

"They made the mistake", he says, "They came out with the big hype. I mean how can they expect people to swallow something like that? (CBS's early ads comparing him with Dylan). And it blows my mind how they can underestimate people so much. All the time, man, it's like...trying to find some room, man. Gimme some damn room. Give me a break, I was trying to tell these guys at the record company, 'wait a second, you guys. Are you trying to kill me?' It was like a suicide attempt on their part. It was like somebody didn't want to make no money.

"I was in this big shadow, man, right from the start...and I'm just getting over this Dylan thing: 'Oh thank God that seems to be fading away' and I'm sitting home thinking thank God people seem to be letting that lie and phwooooeee 'I have seen...'. No, it can't be.

"So immediately I call up the company and I say get that quote out. And it was like, Landau's article. And it was really a nice piece and it meant a lot to me but it was like they took it all out of context and blew it up and who's gonna swallow that? Who's gonna believe that? It's going to piss people off, man. It pisses me off. When I read it I want to strangle the guy who put that thing in there. It's like you want to kill these guys for doin' stuff like that.

"They sneak it in on you. They sneak it in and they don't tell you nutin' It's like 'shot gun murderer chops off eight arms.' It's that kind of tactic, you know. It's that kind of tactic and they pull it for themselves and they pull it for me too...

"It's a stupid thing. Ignore it, you know. Ignore the whole thing because it don't make any sense. So like I'm always ten points down cos not only have you got to play but you got to blow this bullshit out of people's minds first."

It was so beautiful, I felt James Dean was back...When I saw James Dean for the first time I fell on the floor. When I saw Bob Dylan for the first time I fell on the floor. When I saw Bruce Springsteen for the first time I fell on the floor – Jackie De Shannon over a cup of morning coffee.

"Nah, it's like...if anything, you know. All I do, like, I write down my impressions of stuff, like, and what I see, you know. It's like...but if you're looking for something to look to...if you're into the band it's like...I don't know. I can't really see myself like that."

Appel has a more adroit interpretation of the hype-versus-legitimacy dialectic and it goes like this: "I just say to myself 'Listen fellows (Of the press) your vanities may have been up, your ego might have been up but let's stop the bullshit. The kid's really good. He's really different. If you've any kind of talent you'll recognise him. If you don't you'll be run over. It's like a steamroller. We'll win in the end. You've got no chance against us. You've got no chance because we're right. We're good'."

Appel used to write commercial jingles. He was also in the marine reserves and if he comes on a little like Ed Sullivan meets Joseph Goebbels that's roughly the way Springsteen sees it too.

"It's like you can't lay an attitude on people. It's like bullshit. It's like a jive thing. It's a terrible thing. You can't come on like you're some big deal, you know. I ain't into coming on like that because it's a basic thing that's going on. It's a simple thing. It's a band, you know. It's a rock and roll band and you just sing and write songs.

Appel got to meet Springsteen through an early mutual accomplice called Tinker. Tinker started out building drag racers in California, moved to Nassau where he helped launch astronauts into space and wound up manufacturing surfboards in New Jersey. Springsteen met him in a bar. He was 18 years old and Tinker said he could get him a job as a guitar player with Janis Joplin's band.

"I ended up living with him in a surfboard factory for about a year and a half. It was dynamite up there."

The first time Springsteen stepped outside the Jersey state line was with Tinker. Everyone in the band saved up a hundred dollars and drove out to California in a station wagon and a Chevy track, Springsteen flipped from coast to coast during the next four years before realising the best band he could ever have was waiting for him in NJ.

In 1970 or '71 – he doesn't remember – Tinker took him to New York to meet with Appel and just like in a B-movie plot Appel is knocked out by the curly haired kid with the wooden guitar and within months has him eyeballing with the big record company talent scout.

Springsteen at the time is reading Anthony Scaduto's book on Dylan and is fired up over the scene where Dylan launches himself into John Hammond's office, plays a couple of tunes and gets signed in a big hurry. So Springsteen and Appel try their hand and it works a second time.

And that brings us through two low-impact albums followed by a regeneration of Columbia's corporate faith back to the Roxy in Hollywood where by week's end Springsteen is being exalted to a degree that puts you in mind of Appel's steamroller doctrine. By now even Walter Yetnikoff, president of the Columbia Records Group, is up on his chair, stirred, possibly, by the avalanche of dollars that is mounting in his imagination.

The kids too – and by now it's the punter class – have taken on a demeanor that bears more than a passing resemblance to the early Beatle years, except these kids are older and so is Springsteen (26).

But the years are no insulation against the Springsteen wall of faith as codified by Appel, Landau and Philbin and expressed, if haltingly by now, by Brucesteen himself.

Time and Newsweek believed, and the punters believe because anything can be believed that is supported by the indomitable will of unyielding faith as manifest by the aforementioned.

Springsteen could eat a camel whole, so long as he believed such a project wasn't outside his range, so long as the camel believed and the camel trader believed...or a king's new clothes situation where no-one notices the king's fat, naked legs until a kid says "Hey, where's his trousers" and all that faith drains away in a second and a half.

Given that sooner or later someone's going to speak up, the deciding factor remains whether or not Springsteen actually has anything to cover his legs...that something being artistic substance and I'll offer the opinion that Springsteen is indeed naked. That he's no more than a front man for another good rock and roll band, composer of R'n'B slanted material that tips a little in advance of the mean average. The supposed profoundly cerebral inclinations are also misleading because Springsteen has neither the originality or the intentions – political or otherwise – of a Dylan which leaves him with a sackful of punk, loner mannerisms that he's already tiring of...a situation that probably caused the making of Born To Run to be such a vexed and anxious 121/2 months.

Springsteen has a will and a strong dramatic style and the air of the all- American loner who the guys in the gang ask of "where ya goin', Brucie?" and Springsteen grunts and goes off to the pier or to meet his girl whom he loves with a loyal and refined urgency as opposed to, say, Jagger, who could wake up anyplace and not remember how. And he exudes that dumb animal wisdom that made Brando and Dean such attractive propositions, even though Springsteen tries to upset the image with literary pretentions.

Appel, Landau and Philbin think they have to protect and talk up their man otherwise he dies, whereas Springsteen says he needs protecting from Landau, Appel, Philbin and others of their mentality.

So already the wall of faith is beginning to rupture and in six months Springsteen will be either musically wiped out, or more likely, another averagely regarded also-ran shouldering the resentment of punters and business types who by how see themselves as being suckered and duped.

"I used to feel I always was in control", says Springsteen, "but now I'm not so sure."

© Andrew Tyler, 1975
