---
title: "The River Review"
author: "Phil Sutcliffe"
source: "Sounds"
date: "1980-10-11"
category: "Album Review"
---

BRUCE SPRINGSTEEN once said simply this: "I want it all." I've taken it out of context but, judging by the recent Dave Marsh biography, it stands as some kind of truth about him. It's incomplete though because it doesn't add that what he might take from one man or one moment he will try to give back to everybody all the time. He has 'magnanimity' in the full Ancient Roman sense, the ripest generosity of spirit. Like any great artist he will receive the emotional equivalent of three loaves and two fishes and feed five thousand.

The River is a double LP sporting 83 minutes of music on 20 tracks which include eight gut-wrenching classics of the incomparable caliber he achieved with 'Darkness on The Edge Of Town' and several other noble neat misses.

Overall though it has a completely different flavour because of the inclusion of half a dozen entirely barmy rockers with the E Street Band going bananas in the superbly stupid vein of heroes like Cochran, Berry and Lewis. 'Darkness" had no light. 'The River' shimmers with it as Springsteen acknowledges that the surface has its charms, even if any swimmer worth his salt has to dive deep sometimes. So he takes a gambol.

Biffing his guitar like Keith Richard and letting out a terrific yell of a vocal in 'Crush On You' he's running down the street (or rather his projection of self-as-hero is) when a car pulls up at the lights ahead of him and "What was inside, man, was just c'est magnifique/I wanted to hold the bumper and let her drag me down the street!" In 'Sherry Darling' there's what Ian Dury would call a riotous assembly of whooping and clapping going on, but Springsteen is less happy because he's got to drive his girl's mother to the "unemployment agency" and her yapping in the back seat is more than he can take:

You can tell her there's a hot sun beating on the black top She keeps talkin' she'll be walkin' that last block ...Now Sherry my love for you is real But I didn't count on this package deal.

The comic songs are well written, but they end up more about rock'n'rolling than laughing because of Springsteen's flat out approach. He lacks the witty sparkle or Berry or Cochran's delivery. The songs are welcome though as I suspect few people are capable of holding up under the emotional beating he could give out in the course of a wholly serious double LP. Significantly all of the funnies were written this year and most of the heavyweights copyrighted in '79. Whether it was a conscious leavening or merely a change of mood it shows Springsteen's developing sensitivity to the structure of a record.

However, the reason he's there is to over-reach, perform the impossible, dirty you and cleans you, beat up and heal you, do it all night, all or nothing. The Springsteen keywords recur from his previous albums: heart darkness, work, the street death. The Big Subjects all right. Life and death, always asking "why?"

He's brave. He dares to deal in archetypal images – which you might regard less grandly as the oldest clichés in the book. 'The River' itself. He dives into the river with his girl in much the same way as in 'Racing In The Street"

(Darkness) with a different woman he sought purification: "Tonight my baby and me, we're gonna ride to the sea/And wash these sins off our hands." But typically both songs survive the weight of tired tradition bearing down on them by dint of the mighty imaginative effort which has clearly gone into conceiving story and character. A lyric may be only 300 words long, rather less than the average live review in this paper, but you feel he could have written each one as a novel, he seems to have such breadth of scope and knowledge of detail. So the stories and their language reach you as literal first, literary second by a distance. The only exception on this album is 'The Price You Pay' which is overtly philosophical and travels on symbols abstracted from any specific sequence of human events – consequently it's only saved from ponderousness by a beautiful high harmony Springsteen pitches against his lead vocal, saving the sense with sound.

In his best songs Springsteen's people ordinary people, fill the sky, the workaday thrown on to a giant movie screen and revealed as a true epic.

Invariably at the heart of it is a relationship – or rather than that bland- out jargon word, I should say "a passion". Compare Springsteen's performance on The River with Darkness though and you find a huge shift. Where Springsteen used to run bare-naked through his emotions now he wears a sober suit. He's been over the top, he knows he can do that. This time it seems he wanted to see whether he could tear it apart quietly. Brave again. Restraint might have called his bluff, exposed him as just plain noisy rather than soulful. It didn't. The feeling comes achieving through. The Federici/Bittan organ/piano axis responds in excelsis with an empathy which is potent even when they're not blowing down the walls – though they still get to swing the hammer often enough and with stupendous style.

The title track and 'Independence Day' are his most magnificent expressions of ruined passion. The E Street Band matches Springsteen in holding back with a gentleness you'd barely believe from their wall-of-sound thunderings: acoustic guitar, piano pipe organ, a rhythm just above a whisper. In 'The River' they cup this gem of tenderness in their hands:

But I remember us riding in my brother's car Her body tan and wet down at the reservoir At night on them banks I'd lie awake And pull her close just to feel each breath she'd take.

Perhaps the crucial factor about his stories in that they concern blue-collar labourers, like Springsteen's own family, and it's the bitter grind they are forced into which crushes their spirits, isolates and cripples them. After the shotgun wedding, "I got a job working construction for the Johnstown Company But lately there ain't been much work on account of the company."

He floats that idea as the nearest he can come to a rational explanation of what went wrong, but less tangible things had started to twist it back when "for my 19th birthday I got a union card and a wedding coat".

The song leaves its protagonist staring in pained bafflement at the dried-up river bed. 'Independence Day' takes the tragic vision a step further. On stage Springsteen sets this one up in autobiographical terms as being about his feud with his father and leaving home. It's introduced with both of them too worn- out to row anymore, like a couple of characters in Eugene O'Neill play. With hurt, weary grace, balanced by Clarence Clemmons' stately sax solo, Springsteen sings, "There was just no way this house could hold the two of us/I guess that we were just too much of the same kind."

It's a moving description, but the real breakthrough into awareness and the kind of love which can co-exist with independence comes at the end when Springsteen sees that he and his father really are of one flesh, pieces of the same jigsaw, victims:

Nothing we can say can change anything now Because there's just different people coming down here now and they see things in different ways And soon everything we've known will just be swept away And soon everything we've known will just be swept away.

I think that's something like what Aristototle meant when he wrote about 'catharsis' in his definition of tragic drama.

That aspect of the album is great, but bloomy. The jokey ones aren't Springsteen's only answer to weltschermz thought. He's also a roaring optimist who can make that assertion of hope from 'Badlands' course through your veins like a supercharge of adrenalin. 'Hungry Heart', the likely single, leaps at you with gloriously pounding piano, burping sax and a triumphant yell of "Yeah!" from Springsteen. It delivers its novel-length story in two lines:

Got a wife and kids in Baltimore Jack I went out for a ride and I never went back.

It becomes an exultant holler of freedom which consists in having that "hungry heart", even if, by the end of the song, that hunger is for a home and girl again – the searching and the longing, the passion, is all. Springsteen hones the familiar rough edges of his voice for this one track and the effect is stunning, an inspiring innocence.

I can't think of more celebratory piece of music than 'Hungry Heart'. But that innocence has to be weathered by experience to achieve a convincing antithesis to the grief elsewhere on the album. 'Drive All Night' is the song that takes you there. Subdued again, the rhythm section murmurs, Springsteen himself plays a simple figure on piano and then pours his heart into

When I lost you honey sometimes I think I lost my guts too Lying in the heat of the night like prisoners all our lives I get shivers down my spine and all I wanna do is hold you tight.

The forebodings and perspective of death are handled with similar resonance in two other powerful tracks, 'Stolen Car' and 'Wreck On The Highway'. Inevitably he chases the girl, drives all night. We don't and won't know whether he finds her. Probably not. What matters, what stands your hair on end, is the unvanquished avowal of love in all its dimensions – lust and the platonic ideal galvanised into one by the magnitude of emotion. When in the course of a very long, slow coda Springsteen throws everything he's known, lived and imagined and soul' the roof could fall in and I wouldn't notice. Enthralling.

And then it fades, no crescendo.

I emerge from a weekend with this record feeling as my parents did when they'd survived the blitz. Tattered and frayed round the edges and yet with a glow for man and womankind which might lead to dangerous excursions like embracing someone I've never met before. Springsteen and the E street Band have that quality of making you feel more alive – because, I'm convinced, you actually are more open and aware after allowing such music inside you. The River is as good as blood.

© Phil Sutcliffe, 1980
