---
title: "Deep Down In The Tunnel Of Love Express"
author: "Unknown"
source: "Denver Post"
date: "1988-04-20"
category: "Concert Review"
---

The Bottom Line: Bruce puts energy and committment in his performances. You will always get your money's worth.

Ditching the Born In The USA days, scruffy blue-collar muscle shirt personna for a black suit, bolo string tie and a crisp white shirt, New Jersey rocker Bruce Springsteen put on a riveting performance with the Tunnel of Love tour that literally shook Denver, CO on April 20, 1988. It was an intense, rousing 3-hour mega performance super-enhanced with a dynamic 5-piece horn section, a Jersey bar band, La Bamba and the Hubcaps. This horn section was new, and it was a thrilling musical treat. Periodically, they popped on the stage and their stage presence was a powerful addition.

Thankfully, this is an indoor arena at the now demolished McNichols Arena; the ecstatic sound vibrated the huge arena with great acoustics. It was loud and at times thunderous! Springsteen makes you feel his energy and stage presence. The arena was packed, the stage was set with lighting that ranged from dark and somber to light and bright. Taking a different approach to his standards with "the love tour", it was still Bruce.

Tunnel of Love is dark! The opening was unusual, the band members strolling onto a carnival booth. The theme of this concert was love, just plain romantic love, and a departure from his usual blue-collar road warrior, he is so famous for.

It's all about relationships, as he said, "the CD is a reflection of the doubts and fears and mistakes that most people will experience in a real relationship." Bruce also comments that "man meets woman and they fall in love, but the house is haunted and the ridge gets rough." And love songs they were, including the sensual and lusty I'm on Fire ...hey little girl is your daddy home...did he go an leave you all alone.. ohh ohh ohhh I'm on Fire. The intro to that song is memorable while the song is soft as a man aches for a woman. Included in that love theme was the hit One Step Up.

Bruce launched the first half with the dark theme of romantic tunes. When he crooned the beautiful Tougher Than The Rest, and band member Patti Scialfa joined him, you couldn't miss the chemistry between the two. A romantic song with his raspy voice...somebody left somebody's heart in a mess, so if you're looking for love, baby, I'm tougher than the rest. Ms Scialfa was stunning with her flaming red hair captured in the spotlight. She wore a tiny black mini skirt with little boots.

Another love song Bruce says is about a woman struggling to understand her value of her own independent existence the value of life of her child down the road. Spare Parts, is about parts of her past that are keeping her down trying to find something new and beautiful and meanful in her life today. It's not a slow ballad, it has energy.

Springsteen kicked off the second set with some raucous 60's oldies, Devil with a Blue Dress, Good Golly Miss Molly, and Sweet Soul Music. He brought the audience out of the darken tunnel. It was nonstop musical hype. He added Glory Days and the ever popular 70's Rosalita. These performances were so emotionally vigorous they were exhausting to watch! It seemed like he was playing forever with these classics, they were long songs, and he did this one justice. Bruce responds wild for the crowd, he's sweaty and wet. And what a treat this was with the enhancement of musical sounds by the 5-piece horn section joining in for several songs.

I never did like War..what is it good for..absolutely nothing. I still don't like it even if Bruce recorded and sang it!

Acoustic version of Born to Run Cranking out the hits too, Bruce with his guitar and harmonica did an acoustic on Born to Run, which is normally a wild fast song. From Hungry Heart to Born in the USA, and oh the crowd loves that sing-along verse from Hungry Heart, got a wife and kids in Baltimore Jack..I went out for a ride and never came back.... Bruce always includes the audience on this one.

There hasn't been a performance by Springsteen that would duplicate the power this concert projected. It was emotional, exciting, fun and included some fantastic songs!
