---
title: "Springsteen's early grit revealed on famous 1975 show"
author: "Mark Beech"
source: "The Sydney Morning Herald"
date: "2011-05-12"
category: "Concert Review"
---

Bruce Springsteen fans have been waiting more than three decades to hear this.

A concert witnessed by fewer than 300 people has passed into legend among devotees of "the Boss".

Record company Columbia had lost $150,000 on his first two LPs. Springsteen, though, displayed the drive that was to make him a star when playing in Bryn Mawr ("Big Hill" in Welsh), Pennsylvania.

The gig was broadcast on local radio station WMMR and has been the subject of murky bootlegs under different titles.

Now Live at the Main Point 1975 shows clearly why critic Jon Landau was proclaiming Springsteen as the future of rock.

I've seen many Springsteen concerts from the 1980s in which he played as his life depended on it.

Never was the "make or break" truer than at the now-defunct Main Point as he previewed songs for the soon-to-be-released Born to Run.

Its title-track lyric speaks of "broken heroes on a last-chance power drive".

Springsteen could be talking about himself.

The disc is worth seeking out, if only for Wings for Wheels. This is an early version of Thunder Road, with different verses.

Another standout is New York City Serenade, which has an expanded monologue and instrumentals that push it towards 20 minutes.

The E Street Band sound great, boosted by violinist Suki Lahav.

Still, they were to get even better when guitarist Steve van Zandt joined soon after.
