---
title: "Bruce Springsteen, Wembley Stadium, review"
author: "Sarfraz Manzoor"
source: "The Telegraph"
date: "2013-06-15"
category: "Concert Review"
---

This was arguably the most astonishing Bruce Springsteen concert I have ever seen, writes Saf Manzoor.

We can't say we weren't warned. Bruce Springsteen and the E Street Band walked onto the stage of Wembley Stadium, returning to a venue they last played 25 years ago this month, and launched straight into Land of Hope and Dreams.

Springsteen usually includes that song in encores – it was the first sign last night was going to be special – and it was: this was arguably the most astonishing Bruce Springsteen concert I have ever seen.

In recent years Springsteen's British stadium shows have been guilty of being somewhat predictable but last night was different: three songs in and Springsteen approached the crowd, collecting signs with requests. The rarely played Save My Love was followed by Rosalita (Come Out Tonight), This Hard Land and a stupendous Lost in the Flood featuring Roy Bittan's gothic piano playing and searing guitar from Springsteen.

Wembley had been transformed into a giant Springsteen jukebox – all bets were off as to what he would play next. "We can keep on taking requests"Springsteen said, "or we can play the entire Darkness on the Edge of Town record." Naturally the audience went bananas. It was the first time a British audience has been treated to Springsteen performing an entire album and from the fiery intensity of Adam Raised a Cain to Max Weinberg's menacing drums on Something in the Night to Nils Lofgren spinning on one foot while playing the guitar solo during Prove it all Night with his teeth it was breathtaking.

The audience were about as jubilant as it was possible to be considering they were hearing 10 songs streaked with anger, despair and desperation. And then it was back to the jukebox – the whole stadium singing Waiting on a Sunny Day back to a grinning Bruce. The man is in indecently good shape for someone who will be 64 in September. I looked around at the crowd, many of whom looked like they weren't even born the last time Springsteen was at Wembley. The youthful enthusiasm of the audience had clearly affected Springsteen – even Born to Run, which he sings every show, felt newly urgent. Dancing in the Dark prompted a sprouting of beautiful young women – standing on friends' shoulders waving placards begging Bruce to dance with them. "One Dollar to Dance with my mum" read one sign, complete with dollar note. That did the trick. The last time Springsteen played London was the night of the Hyde Park shutdown – he and McCartney had the power pulled during Twist and Shout. This time we heard the full song followed by an emotional 10th Avenue Freeze-Out with tributes to lost comrades Clarence Clemons and Danny Federici and then just as it seemed like it was all over he had one final surprise – Thunder Road, Springsteen alone on stage, his voice echoing around the stadium. And with that he was gone. As he left the stage I saw a girl with a sign – not a song request but a statement. It read: "Thanks for making our lives better."
