---
title: "Springsteen digs deep, cuts loose at Yum! Center"
author: "Jeffrey Lee Puckett"
source: "The Courier Journal"
date: "2016-02-21"
category: "Concert Review"
---

Springsteen and The E Street Band are performing the 1980 album in its entirety on this tour, and when introducing it Sunday night at the KFC Yum!

Center, Springsteen talked about his intent when writing the album. He had been making what he called "outsider records" and wanted to write one that explored what it meant to be an insider, to make meaningful connections.

He also, and this was an impossible task, wanted to make a record as big as life, one that contained fun, dancing, laughter, sex, comradeship, love, faith, lonely nights and teardrops.

"I figured if I could make a record that contained all of those things, I'd get a little bit closer to realizing them in my own life", he said.

He said this surrounded by his wife of 25 years, Patti Scialfa, and friends that go back as far as 1971: Garry Tallent, Steve Van Zandt, Roy Bittan, Max Weinberg. In other words, all of the things that he was looking for when writing "The River" are now his in abundance. The tour itself answers all of the questions he had as a 29-year-old.

Springsteen already had some of what he was looking for in 1980, but it's sometimes hard to see what's right in front of you, or maybe you can see it but not quite get your hands around it. That happens a lot to the characters who populate "The River", and Springsteen brought them to riveting life Sunday night with a set that balanced unhinged joy with a few of those teardrops.

Playing "The River" in its entirety is a bold move. Like nearly all double albums it has awkward moments, and there are stretches that work better in the quiet of a darkened living room than on stage, but Springsteen and the E Street Band are bold performers, capable of willing a show into extraordinary existence. For the most part, they did just that.

The opening salvo of "The Ties That Bind", "Sherry Darling", Jackson Cage"Two Hearts", "Independence Day", "Hungry Heart" and "Out in the Street" was sheer perfection - 25 minutes that encapsulated most of the album's primary themes.

Springsteen and the band, which also includes Nils Lofgren, Soozie Tyrell, Jake Clemons and Charles Giordano, were dead solid and lighter than air. They captured the joy that makes "Sherry Darling" and "Out in the Street" vital, and the tight-lipped desperation crucial to "Jackson Cage" and "The Ties That Bind." Most impressive, however, may have been the fine line between those extremes central to "Two Hearts"; they nailed it perfectly.

Some of the throwaway rockers on "The River" are still throwaways, but they did what they were meant to do: provide a respite from the album's harsher realities. Still, the album's middle section has always had its problems, mostly with uneven pacing. That surfaced Sunday night, although it wasn't a dealbreaker unless you were a drunk 25-year-old with the attention span of a gnat - looking at you section 116, row D, seats 12 and 13.

The only real surprises during "The River" were how "Point Blank" felt oddly neutered compared to its usual, and intended, claustrophobia, and how a long, slow build-up to "I Wanna Marry You" elevated a good song to an outright great one. The set ended on a note of hopeful sadness with "Wreck on the Highway"followed by a brief statement and then a cheerful, "That's 'The River'!"

And then there was an entirely different concert. The second act.

Springsteen and band tore through "Badlands", "Lonesome Day", "Because the Night", "She's the One", "Human Touch", "The Rising", "Thunder Road", "Born in the U.S.A.", "Born to Run", "Dancing in the Dark", "Rosalita (Come Out Tonight)", The Isley Brothers' "Shout" and "Bobby Jean."

"Rosalita", a nightly highlight on the original "The River" tour, lived up to its legend. It was a celebration of everything grand about rock 'n' roll: young love, young lust, hostile parents and an open door that leads to the open road. Salvation waits at the end of it, of course, because that's what rock 'n' roll promises the young.

But even people forced to deal in real life with the emotional traumas littered throughout "The River" can still believe in the open road, if only for a few minutes, especially when Springsteen's behind the wheel and Miami Steve is riding shotgun, bandana whipping in the breeze while the E Street Band plays like a jungle fire.
