---
title: "Springsteen Picks The Grapes Of Wrath"
author: "Steve Morse"
source: "Boston Globe"
date: "1995-11-19"
category: "Album Review"
subcategory: "The Ghost of Tom Joad"
---

Confusion reigns. Should we applaud Bruce Springsteen for making the most uncommercial record of his career? Or should we have his pulse checked? Maybe a little of both after hearing his new disc, "The Ghost of Tom Joad", which is easily the darkest, bleakest record of his career. It makes his earlier solo set of hard-luck tales, "Nebraska", seem like a sitcom.

Springsteen has confounded us again. Where some fans expected a lively follow- up to his last two albums, "Lucky Town" and "Human Touch", he's opted to strip down his sound and tug at the heartstrings with an occasionally inspired, but also occasionally flat, set of songs. Instead of seeking the arena stardom of yore, Springsteen adopts the acoustic sparseness of a '90s Woody Guthrie, singing haunting songs about societal outcasts. (It will be followed by his first-ever solo acoustic tour, due to stop at the Orpheum Dec. 15 and 16.)

The new album was sparked by the figure of Tom Joad, the Depression-era former convict/migrant worker in John Steinbeck's novel "The Grapes of Wrath." Joad crosses the country and is radicalized by what he sees. Joad's story is obviously on Springsteen's mind in the title track, where he sings: "I'm sittin' down here in the campfire light/ Waitin' on the ghost of Tom Joad/ Now Tom said, 'Mom, wherever there's a cop beatin' a guy/ Wherever a hungry newborn baby cries/ Where there's a fight 'gainst the blood and hatred in the air/ Look for me Mom, I'll be there.'"

Does this sound like election-year rhetoric? Could be. Springsteen is obviously no friend of the Newt Gingrich crowd. But there appears to be a deeper motive at work. Springsteen has always been on the side of the downtrodden and the down-on-their luck: Just look at the thousands of dollars he's given to food banks and to disabled Vietnam veterans through the years, or look at his continuing admiration for populists like Guthrie. This is a unifying thread in Springsteen's music dating to his scuffling days on the Jersey shore in the early '70s. He's a Beverly Hills millionaire now, but maybe the guilt of living in such palatial surroundings lures him even more to the campfires of Tom Joad.

There is a nobility that courses through this album, much as it did in Guthrie's music. Springsteen, singing as passionately as ever, exudes sympathy for the prison convict of "Straight Time" who tries to lead a traditional family life but can't. He dignifies the Mexican migrant workers of "Sinaloa Cowboys" who find they can make more money making amphetamines in a hidden desert laboratory than in picking peaches. One of the brothers dies when the lab blows up in an accident. Springsteen, in a melancholy twang, describes the one left behind: "He kissed his brother's lips and put him in his grave." Or, as he quotes the brothers' father as saying: "For everything the north gives, it exacts a price in return."

Death haunts this album, more so than any album that Springsteen has made. And the scary thing is that he's talking about contemporary situations, not about Dust Bowl farmers in the '30s. In the unutterably sad "Balboa Park", he looks at the forlorn "border boys" who turn tricks for the "men in their Mercedes" in San Diego. One of the boys, Spider, is hit and killed by the car of a border patrol officer in a nighttime raid. Sings Springsteen in hushed horror: "As the car sped away, Spider held his stomach/ Limped to his blanket 'neath the underpass/ Lied there tasting his own blood on his tongue/ Closed his eyes and listened to the cars rushin' by so fast."

That's not all. In "The New Timer", featuring just Springsteen and his softly played acoustic guitar, a railroad hobo is killed on "a muddy hill" with no witnesses, leading the protagonist, a once-innocent youth from Pennysylvania, to sleep with a machete by his side. And in the plaintive "Galveston Bay"trouble erupts between Vietnamese immigrants and the Texas Klan whose slogan is "America for Americans." One Vietnamese fisherman kills two Texans in self- defense and becomes a marked man. Having come from Saigon, he's a Vietnamese who once "fought side by side with the Americans." The irony is not lost on Springsteen or on us.

The album's best songs are "Dry Lightning" (about a man who falls in love with an exotic dancer) and "Youngstown", a saga of a family seemingly doomed to work in factories from generation to generation. It's the only song that rises above a slow tempo (unlike the case with "Nebraska", which had a couple of uptempo numbers), and is enhanced by violinist Soosie Tyrell, bassist Garry Tallent and keyboardist Danny Federici. The last two are members of Springsteen's longtime E Street Band, but they're the only E Streeters on the album. Not even keyboardist Roy Bittan is there this time.

Would Springsteen's record label have preferred a reunion album with the E Street Band? You bet. Instead they got an album that will have a hard time getting airplay. Rock radio won't play this; it's difficult to imagine where it will get played, given radio's preference for lulling escapism rather than the harsh realities this disc portrays. In fact, the only truly hopeful song is "Across the Border", about a man dreaming of meeting his lover. "For what are we without hope in our hearts/ That someday we'll drink from God's blessed waters", Springsteen sings before adding a stately harmonica coda.

As for the album's slow tempos, Springsteen appears to be following his Oscar- winning song about AIDS, "Streets of Philadelphia." That song had a grandeur, though, that some of these newer, more repetitious songs don't have. This album is likely to become an asterisk on Springsteen's career. It's heartfelt, but it tries a little too hard to be convincing, even down to the inside photo of Springsteen, in a cowboy hat, standing by a desolate prairie highway.

True fans, however, will recall that Springsteen followed his 1982 "Nebraska" album with "Born in the U.S.A.", the most popular record of his career. Maybe he's building up to a similar return to rock glories now that he's gotten the anguished "Tom Joad" out of his system.