---
title: "Boss Re-ignites In Spain"
author: "Steve Knopper"
source: "Chicago Tribune"
date: "1999-04-11"
category: "Concert Review"
---

Springsteen, E Street Band Reunite After A Decade For World Tour

BARCELONA, Spain — Though Bruce Springsteen had to read his Spanish remarks from a prepared speech and didn't do the song about Spanish Johnny, the language barrier made no difference. His first show with the E Street Band in a decade Friday night made sense in almost any dialect.

Every time Springsteen paused for breath, and that was rare in an almost three-hour show that left the singer's shirt drenched with sweat, 19,000 fans chanted the "Ole" soccer anthem. One Spanish-speaking fan draped himself in an American flag; another wore a New Jersey sweat shirt.

Americans showed up too. Brennan Hughes, 19, a student from Whitefish, Mont., living in Barcelona, said he received tickets from "my dad's secretary, who's married to somebody who knows Bruce Springsteen."

Low on experimentation and high on renewing old friendships, the Palau Sant Jordi arena concert proved the E Street Band's thunderous bar-and-stadium rock is as tight as ever, especially on straightforward anthems like "Badlands""Out in the Street" and "She's the One."

In a night of big moments--like a four-guitar "Born to Run" and a version of "Light of Day" that began as punk rock and downshifted into gospel testifying --the little moments distinguished Springsteen's reunion with the E Street Band. Guitarist Nils Lofgren stood on his tiptoes to reach the microphone.

During "Out in the Street", Clarence "The Big Man" Clemons playfully lifted Lofgren out of his way.

"We're not here for a vacation to your lovely seaside community", Springsteen declared, fast-talking like a preacher running an auction. "We're here for a purpose ...to rededicate you to the power, the magic, the mystery, the monastery of rock 'n' roll."

The E Street Band, which began with Springsteen in scruffy New Jersey nightclubs in the early '70s, hasn't performed with its old boss since 1989\.

For the past decade, the singer-songwriter has played acoustic solo tours, collaborated with a makeshift rock and soul revue and experimented with guitar-and-synthesizer music like "Streets of Philadelphia."

Springsteen spent equal time on hard-rock anthems, especially a screaming- guitar version of "Murder Incorporated", and bitter country-folk songs like the rejiggered "Youngstown" and "Mansion on the Hill." His experiments failed a couple of times, such as an unfocused attempt to make 1981's "The River" more soulful with jazzy saxophone solos.

All eight members of the mid-'80s E Street Band have returned, including Springsteen's wife, singer Patti Scialfa; drummer Max Weinberg, on hiatus from "Late Night With Conan O'Brien"; guitarist Steve Van Zandt, who stars in HBO's New Jersey mobster drama "The Sopranos"; organist Danny Federici, who recorded a solo album; and bassist Garry Tallent and pianist Roy Bittan, who have produced artists from Dave Alvin to Lucinda Williams.

Springsteen emphasized songs of friendship and loyalty, opening with "My Love Will Not Let You Down" and closing with a hymnlike "If I Should Fall Behind"in which Van Zandt, Scialfa, Clemons and Lofgren split the "wait for me" choruses while Springsteen strummed his guitar nearby.
