---
title: "Springsteen briefly recaptures energy, magic from the past"
author: "Greg Kot"
source: "Chicago Tribune"
date: "2002-09-25"
category: "Concert Review"
---

Bruce Springsteen was working it but not yet blowing the doors down Wednesday at the United Center. Perhaps that's the best we could expect at this stage of his career--solemn work, earnest music, well-intentioned sentiments. But not transcendence, not a moment when the hairs on the back of the neck stand at attention. It's not 1978 anymore, and every tour since has pulled a little further away from that peak.

Then Springsteen and the E Street Band locked into "Worlds Apart", the most adventurous song on "The Rising", his new album of post-Sept. 11 songs, and something clicked. Fiddle and accordion, finger-cymbals and mournful voices conjured a world of sound, East meeting West on the stage. "We've got this moment now to live, then it's all just dust and dark", Springsteen sang, clinging to hope. Then the singer and Steve Van Zandt faced off, the mourning compressed into their storming guitars, blood trickling from one of Springsteen's fingertips as he slashed the strings.

Feedback lingered and the E Streeters crashed into "Badlands", Max Weinberg's wrists pouncing cobralike at the cymbals, a defiant sound in the face of heartbreak, then with the final chord fading they plunged into "She's the One", with its monolithic Bo Diddley beat. Grief turned to rage, then release.

It was one of those moments when a concert finds its feet and lodges in the memory, a keeper--even by Springsteen's high standards.

His concerts lately have been more about comfort than confrontation, ritual rather than surprise. Fans cheer Clarence Clemons before he plays his saxophone, because they already know what notes they're going to hear, and the "Big Man" inevitably delivers. There will be Van Zandt mugging in his gypsy finery and sharing a microphone with "The Boss." And there will be Springsteen climbing atop Roy Bittan's grand piano to lead the crowd in a sing-along, this time during "Mary's Place."

But Springsteen's tours are never static, and in the seven weeks since the current road trip opened in New Jersey, the set is still a work in progress, as though Springsteen were still trying to figure out what tone to strike. It was disappointing that one of his most pointed and controversial recent songs, "American Skin (41 Shots)", has been dropped from the set list, and he's once again performing "Born in the USA" as an arena anthem rather than a caustic blues about duty and reward.

But Springsteen has discovered the heart of several new songs: "Empty Sky" was performed as a sparse, mountain-soul duet with his wife, Patti Scialfa, their high harmonies evoking the eerie tone of a musical saw; "My City of Ruins" as a solo piano piece transformed into a gospel chant; and "Into the Fire" winding down as an a cappella hymn.

The singer--graying but still vital in blue-collar black--also worked the back pages of his catalog, resurrecting "Jackson Cage" from "The River" (1980) and "For You" from his 1973 debut album. The latter was performed alone at the piano, transforming a song of youthful desire into a plea for community.

For that's ultimately what Springsteen's music tries to achieve. Though "The Rising" is being chastised in some quarters for not being indignant enough, Springsteen's musical politics have always been tempered by a fundamental compassion, an inclusiveness that throws its arms wide around an audience, with the house lights illuminating their joint efforts. When Pearl Jam singer and Evanston native Eddie Vedder joined Springsteen to take the lead vocal on "My Hometown", it was only fitting. At its best, Springsteen's music expands to meet the moment. It's big enough for everyone to climb into its embrace.
