---
title: "The Rocky Road to Rock Stardom"
author: "JOHN ROCKWELL"
source: "The New York Times"
date: "1975-08-15"
category: "Commentary"
---

It was as if Mick Jagger had decided to play in a 400 seat club. The sidewalks of Mercer and Fourth Streets surrounding the Bottom Line Wednesday night were alive with restless rock fans, some herded into lines and some milling excitedly about. The cause of all the turmoil was a man who might just be the next Mr. Jagger, a 25year‐oid rock 'n' roll poet from New Jersey named Bruce Springsteen. And as his earlier performances here had led one expect, he gave two shows Wednesday that will rank among the great rock experiences of those luck/ enough to get in. Mr. Springsteen has it all—he is a great lyricist and songwriter, he is a wonderful singer, guitarist and piano player, lie has one of the best rock bands anybody has ever heard, and he is as charismatic a stage figure rock has produced.

Playing for 10 Years

And yet there has been something strange and unsure about Mr. Springsteen's career so far. He has been playing publicly for 10 years and he has had a record contract for three. Why hasn't he become an internationally known superstar long since, if he's as good everybdy who sees him knows him to be?

The answer to that question turns out to be instructive not only about him, but about the whole process rock stardom.

Successful rock careers follow a generally predictable pattern. A young artist gathers experience playing in his home town. Eventually he finds a manager and wins recording contract. With record‐company support, records an album that is promoted at radio stations around the country. In conjunction with tours and favorable recepion in the press, the album begins to be heard more and more on the radio, and sales pick up.

Tours are important both to gain exposure for the artist and to support an album just as it goes on sale. Young artists typically begin in clubs, then move on to serve as opening acts for established stars in big halls, then drop back down to 3.000‐seat facilities in cities and on college campuses, and then finally work their way up to the superstardom of indoor sports arenas (like Madison Square Garden) and even outdoor stadiums.

Mr. Springsteen's career has followed that pattern but in a very rough, erratic and drawn‐out way. If he finally breaks into massive stardom in the next few months—as everyone associated with him predicts he will—the controversies will continue as to whether he could have been a star sooner than this or whether his stardom will have a special genuineness for having been won without compromise. Mr. Springsteen —the_name is Dutch—was born and raised in Freehold, N.J., and his whole identity derives from a youth spent in New Jersey coastal towns and shuttling in and out of Manhattan.

When he was in his midteens, his parents moved to California—his father is now a bus driver in San Mateo, south of San Francisco—and Mr. Springsteen was left pretty much on his own. He went to high school in Freehold and tried college for a short while, but for the last 10 years his life has really been defined by rock music.

Not only did he organize a whole series of New Jersey bands with names like Child, Steel Mill and Dr. Zoom and the Sonic Boom, but he also kept cropping up in Greenwich Village spots like the Cafe Wha? and Max's Kansas City as a solo artist. To this day, he has tapes showing his proficiency in almost every popular form of nineteen‐sixties rock‐pop, from folk to electric blues to heavy metal.

In 1972, having acquired the services of one Mike Appel as his manager, he made contact with a producer at Columbia Records, John Hammond, who had introduced Bob Dylan to the label. He was signed by Clive Davis, then president of Columbia, and his first album—"Greetings from Asbury Park, N. J." was released in late 1972.

But at this point the normal career machine began to sputter. The album received mixed notices and fared hesitantly on the market. Confronted with an apparent failure and with Mr. Davis—who had backed him extravagantly—ousted from Columbia and under a cloud, the next album received far less attention than it deserved.

Mr. Springsteen, discouraged over these setbacks, turned his attentions to his live performances, building up his present band and performing here and there throughout the country throughout 1974. The performances were enormously successful, winning him cult followings in most of the cities and college towns. Sales on the first two albums continued steadily if unspectacularly — the two have even made it back onto the upper reaches of the sales charts Flow.

But success in rock is measured ultimately by record a sales, and so everybody was waiting for the next Springsteen album, the one that would make him a star, And Mr. Springsteen was hung up in the studio, selfconsciously trying to create that album and risking a loss of momentum in his live‐performance career as he struggled away.

There are all sorts of explanations for why Mr. Springsteen hasn't made it yet to superstardom. One is the simple profusion of his own gifts. Mr. Springsteen can do anything he chooses in rock music, and it has sometimes been difficult for him to decide what that should be. As Jon Landau—who quit his job as recordings editor of "Rolling Stone" magazine to co‐produce the new Springsteen album—puts it, "The indecision comes from fear. If you do one thing, that means you can't do another. Bruce wants it all. He always wants it all."

Others have suggested that Mr. Appel, Mr. Springsteen's manager, has hurt his career more than he has helped it. This is partly a question of Mr. Appel's abrasive belligerence and partly a matter of career decisions. Mr. Springsteen customarily plays sets that last over two hours. That makes it nearly impossible for him to open for other acts. And he has resisted playing in arenas and stadiums.

"I tried playing big halls", he said on Tuesday on the beach at Long Branch, N.J., where he now lives. "I couldn't stand it. Everybody was so far away and the band couldn't hear. Maybe if all those people had been there to see me, it would have been different."

"He should be a very large star already, and maybe he will be without Mike Appel", said one music‐business figure. "But so far he's made no attempt to win new fans. In live performance he plays totally to the cult."

Mr. Landau rejects that notion. "Mike is the only person who saw what Bruce was about", he says. "Bruce has refused to make any of those goes‐without‐saying compromises, and the result will be that he's about to do it his way, not in the prefab way of other rock careers."

Another difficulty has been a possible lack of recordcompany support after the first album. But Ron McCarrell, Columbia's director of East Coast product management, denied that the label had ever slackened in its support of Mr. Springsteen. "The company has looked at it as a commitment of time and money that would pay off later", he said.

Certainly Columbia seems primed to support the new album, "Born to Run", to the full extent of its capabilities. It has purchased 1,000 seats for Mr.

Springsteen's five‐day run at the Bottom Line (leaving 3,000 for the general public), to expose him to the press, radio personnel, record dealers and Columbia employees whose enthusiasm will be needed to push the record properly.

The new album sounds wonderful on a first couple of hearings, but one of Mr. Springsteen's biggest problems so far has been a discrepancy between the impact of his live performances and his albums. Partly, one suspects, this is an insoluble difficulty. Mr. Springsteen's performances are so overwhelming, and extend so far beyond sound alone (especially the sound capturable on disc) that records can only be a pale reflection.

Mr. Springsteen's performances arise out of his own enormous urgency. "I don't like to let myself down", was the way he put it on Tuesday. "I expect everybody in the band to be playing like it's the last time. When it doesn't happen, don't say, "Well, there'll be other time', All I can think about is right now."

It's that kind of intensity that seems the ultimate explanation for Mr.

Springsteen's curious career. His songs are about the street life of the New Jersey coast towns and New York City. But just as he owes his authenticity to his roots, so is he bound by a suspicious, nervous, provincial mentality that makes him indecisive in the glittering world of rock careerdom.

Success will answer a lot of nagging old questions and pose a whole host of new ones. One hopes Mr. Springsteen is ready for the stardom he's been struggling for—both for his own sake and for the sake of the overwhelming music he seems destined to produce.
