---
title: "If There Hadn't Been a Bruce Springsteen, Then the Critics Would Have Made Him Up"
author: "Henry Edwards"
source: "The New York Times"
date: "1975-10-05"
category: "Commentary"
---

"Comparable to all the greats", exclaimed Rolling Stone critic Dave Marsh in a recent rave review of Bruce Springsteen, a new idol of the rock music scene.

By "greats", Marsh made it clear he had in mind Bob Dylan and The Who's Pete Townshend as a couple of Springsteen's peers.

"Springsteen fashions the kind of seamless, 150‐minute performance that most artists only dream about", wrote the Village Voice's. Paul Nelson a couple of weeks ago. Nelson then declared that Springsteen had entered a charmed circle which included Dylan, the Rolling Stones, Jackson Browne and the New York Dolls—each having given one of the most "moving" performances he'd ever experienced.

"A man who just might be the next Mr. Jagger", were the words which The New York Times rock critic John Rockwell applied to Springsteen a couple weeks ago.

Such praise for Springsteen, although lavish, is becoming commonplace. Indeed, the recent release of Bruce Springsteen's third album, "Born to Run", and his stint at the Bottom Line in Greenwich Village last month, have inspired virtually all of the nation's rock music critics to unloose some of their most resounding huzzahs in recent memory.

Each year, numerous rock music performers receive good reviews; occasionally a newcomer is compared to one of the rockland giants. Hardly ever, however, does a performer emerge who is compared to all of them. And therefore, the extraordinary reception of Bruce Springsteen, a heretofore littleknown 26‐year‐old New Jersey‐born rock composer‐performer, raises some intriguing questions. For example: Is Springsteen really the Rock Messiah he is cracked up to be? What does he do and how does he bring rock music critics to such ecstasy? What about the conspicuous flaws in his music making? Why have most critics ignored these flaws? And finally, is it possible that the critical raves tell us more about rock music criticism itself than about the object of all this heady exultation?

To begin with, Springsteen (the name was originally German) composes his own muSic and lyrics, sings to his own guitar accompaniment, and is generally supported by a band consisting of a bass, guitar, sax, piano and organ. Like a number of current rock acts, his appearances are also highly theatrical And so "he requires sophisticated lighting and amplification as well. The result isthunderous, exuberant, sexy And street tough. To understand both the virtues and flaws of his performance, it is necessary to examine, first, his lyrics, then his musicianship and finally his theatrical

A good part of Springsteen's appeal stems from the words he sings. In his most recent engagements, he has commenced his shows with "Thunder Road", one of many Springsteen variations of those familiar rock 'n' roll anthems of adolescence like The Animals' mid‐1960's classic "We Gotta Get Outta This Place" that are derived from films such as "Rebel Without a Cause" and similar B‐films that followed. Such songs conjure one of rock'n' roll's most sentimentalized, romanticized and still‐popular stereotypes: the outlawteen.

The kid is lonely, lost, and desperate, and his only release is to toss a girl into a car and zoom down a highway to nowhere. As neatly structured as they are cliched, these anthems are nevertheless often lots of fun. Springsteen's "Thunder Road", however, is notable chiefly for its repetitiousness.

• Springsteen begins:\* "The screen door slams/Mary's dress waves/Like a, vision she dances across the porch/As the radio plays/ Roy Orbison singing for the lonely/Hey that's me and I want you only...Show a little faith, there's magic in the night/You ain't a beauty, but hey you're all right/Oh that's allright with me... Well now I'm no hero/ That's understood/All the redemption I can offer, girl/Is beneath this dirty hood... Well the night's busting open/These two lanes will take Us anywhere/We got one last chance to make it real/To trade in these wings on some wheels/Climb in back/ Heaven's waiting on down the tracks..."

As if the point is still not clear, he goes on: "Well I got this guitar/And I learned how to mace it talk/ And my car's out back/If you're ready to take that long walk/From your front ?? porch to my front seat..."

Finally at the song's end, he once again urges Mary to go for the drive, repeating himself yet again: "... so Mary climb in/It's a town full of loser's/And I'm pulling out of here to win."

The "kid‐as‐loser" is the familiar theme of "Born to Run", which is emerging as the album's hit single. This long‐winded anthem begins: "In the day we sweat it out in the streets of a runaway American dream/At night we ride through mansions of glory in suicide machines/Sprung out from cages out on Highway 9/Chrome wheeled, fuel injected/And steppin' out over the line/Baby this town rips. bones from your back/It's a death trap, it's a suicide rap/We gotta get out while we're young/Cause tramps like us, baby we born to run..."

• Teens ‐ in ‐ perpetual motion are also on the move in Springsteen's equally wordy "Backstreets": "One soft infested summer/Me‐and Terry became friends/Trying in vain to breathe/The fire we was born in/Catching rides to the outskirts/Trying faith between our teeth/Sleeping in that old abandoned beach house/Getting wasted in the heat/And hiding on the backstreets..."

If Springsteen is tireless in his evocation of the rock rebel, he occasionally seeks to leaven matters with symbolism. But unfortunately the result Is only a glossy species of fake poetry. In his "Jungleland", for, example, the adolescent punk becomes "Magic Rat" and the city is "Jungleland": "The Rangers had a homecoming/In Harlem late last night/And the Magic Rat drove his sleek machine/Over the Jersey state line/Barefoot girl sitting on the hood of a Dodge/Drinking warm beer in the soft summer rain/Together they disappear take a stab at romance/Md disappear down Flamingo Lane/Well the maximum Lawmen run down Flamingo/Chasing the Rat and the barefoot girl/And the kids, round here look just like shadows/‐Always quiet, holding hands/From the churches to the jails/Tonight is all silence in the world/As we take nur stand/Down in Jungleland..."

Springsteen's musical accompaniment is simply torrential. On record, the barrage of bass, drums and brass sounds, the layer on layers of guitars, saxophones, trumpets, pianos and glockenspiels, often manages to overwnelm the singer's harsh baritone. In concert, the sledgehammer blows of his music, one right after another, have a way of cancelling each other out‐unless one exults in pounding repetition.

For all its faults, however, Springsteen's "Born to Run" album can grow on a listener. Indeed, what is likeable although ultimately disappointing about, it is the fact that the knowledgeable listener soon discovers Springsteen as a collagist who does not form his collage into something fresh. He simply pastes together bits and pieces, and many of the bits thus embalmed are copies of some of rock 'n' roll's finest moments. Springsteen's vocal quality and delivery is sometimes a dead ringer for Roy Orbison's. In places, his melodÿ for "She's the One" sounds suspiciously like the theme for the mid‐1960's TV rock show "Shindig" and the number concludes with one of Bo Diddley's more familiar motifs.

"Born to Run", begins with an attention‐grabbing drum roll borrowed from the Raspberries who, in turn, borrowed it from The Who; its mid‐number crescendo could have been lifted from an Alice Cooper hit.

Indeed, the sound of the album itself is an effort to re‐create and pay tribute to the plush, thickly cushioned sound made famous by the producer Phil Spector during the mid‐1960's, and yet, in the last analysis, instrumental and electronic overkill has led Springsteen, along with co‐producers Mike Appel and Jon Landau (the former Rolling Stone rock critic), to create musical sludge. On "Backstreets", for example, the composer finds himself contending with drums that sound as if they have been equalized to produce a dull roar and a piano which appears to have been electronically rigged to generate a whole volley of notes where just a few would suffice, The incessant organ runs that are bathed in echo make this concoction the more difficult to sort Springsteen from the muddle. This same instrumental combination was used, by the way, by the producer Bob Johnson on Bob Dylan's, "Blonde on Blonde" in 1966 to create a stark recording in which the electrified instruments did not wage war against the performer. Excess on "Born to Run" finds Springsteen not running but instead virtually burrowing his way out of the bottom of a musical tunnel bf his own devising.

Critics agree that Springsteen's magic has been difficult to capture on disk; they suggest that he must he seen and heard live to be appreciated. Inevitably dressed in tight jeans and tee shirt, a leather jacket, sneakers and cap, the grinning, scruffily bearded performer comes on as the prototype of punkishness. He also takes to the stage with the nervy bravado of a real‐life punk commanding a pool table in a low‐life barroom.

With relentless energy, total commitment and plenty of glee, he shouts two and a half hours worth of his anthems of teen desperation as if his message could change the world. Never at rest, he swaggers, whirls, kicks, leaps, pirouettes, jumps onto the piano and occasionally improvises a dance that looks like a madcap tango. Eventually, his movements become as repetitious as his lyrics, but it doesn't seem to matter to his fans. They know he's having a ball, exulting in the rock 'n' roll experience and giving the sort of heartattack‐defying performance ("Can I keep up this fever pitch ten minutes longer?") that rock fans have long doted upon. The 25 roaring repetitions of the line "HIDING IN THE BACKSTREETS" with which he concludes "Backstreets" pretty well reveals his stupendous ehergy and give‐'em‐hell disposition; and yet, such raw dynamics, for all the fun they may provide, simply cannot disguise the fact that for the most part. Springsteen's lyrics are an effusive jumble, his melodies either secondhand or undistinguished and his tedious.

Given such obvious flaws, there has to be another important ingredient in the success of Bruce Springsteen: namely, vigorous promotion nicely meshing with a receptive climate of opinion. The stage was set back in 1972 with Springsteen's first album "Greetings From Asbury Park, N.J." The critics raved, but the album did not sell.

A year later, his second album, "The Wild, the Innocent and the E Street Shuffle", created a similar response—critical praise and paltry sales. Then came this year's "Born to Run" and the managers of Columbia Records decided to gamble unusually great sums of money in the promotion of this record—a decision which led to a remarkable number of hard‐sell radio commercials, full‐page advertisements in the trade and consumer press, the purchase of 1,000 tickets for promotional purposes at The Bottom Line when Springsteen appeared there in early September, and, of course, mass distribiutidn of the new album to record stores around the country.

This decision was prompted, first of all, because the record company executives knew their business depends on the creation of new sensations every year. Accordingly, they have to promote somebody. In the second place, the decision to gamble on Springsteen must have taken note of the fact that in this time of record‐industry doldrums, the return of the middle‐of‐the‐road performers such as Paul Anka and the popularity of disco music, there is a large potential rock music audience which feels neglected. In such a climate, the very derivativeness of Springsteen's music, and the throwback quality of his punkish persona have an irresistible appeal —both for younger rock music fans who were discovering their own new stars for the first time as well as older nostalgists hankering for the return of the days when rock music was conkdered a "challenge to the establishment" and rock performers were looked upon as symbolic rebels.

Not the least of those who would be struck by this appeal would be the rock music critics themselves. Nostalgists all, they could be counted on once again to champion Springsteen, particularly after a long period in which there had been precious few new rock sensations to set a critic's pen flying. But those not infected with rock music nostalgia may be forgiven if, after the first 10 minutes of hearing Springsteen sing, they find the hoopla tiresome and the performer vacuous. ■
