---
title: "Pop Folk Poets A Band of Loners"
author: "John Rockwell"
source: "The New York Times"
date: "1973-01-21"
category: "Commentary"
---

AMERICA is still a land of loners, for all the homogenization of the plastic culture and the retribalization of the electronic culture. And nowhere do those loners breed more tenaciously than in the field of folk-pop. The hills—and the cities, too—are full of wandering minstrels, itinerant instrumentalists and allpurpose musical eccentrics. College campuses, at least on warm days, are full of them, picking and wailing in a variety of more or less authentic indigenous idioms. They glorify the land and its people in a way that might give great comfort to Mr. Nixon, if only he and the other politicians full of rhetoric about "bringing us together" could get past the pervasive antiestablishment sentiments of their songs.

Bob Dylan has been the best-known example of the species in recent years, of course, and it was he more than any other who effected the fusion between hopelessly noncommercial folkies and the big, glittering world of pop-music success. Nowadays, the monthly record lists are glutted with singersongwriters who have broken away from bands, or who never associated themselves with them in the first place. Jumbling a thousand regional styles, backed sometimes by downright luxurious arangements and often reared in the very cradle of upperclass urban comfort, they remain folk poets nonetheless. And sometimes, they manage miraculously to avoid the Self-consciousness one might think inherent in their status.

Occasionally, after a dose of concentrated listening, they become a little hard to tell apart, all these determinedly American Bills and Bobs and Johns and Kens. And, in fact, poetic originality seems a little easier to come by than musical. Again Dylan is, She model. For all the sometimes extravagant invention of his verse, his music remained comfortably mundane, a few most notable exceptions aside. Towards the end of his career (I speak as if it's over, which may be a bit premature) he was turning out songs of an almost defiantly prosaic musical content. But at the very end, after he had gotten his voice back into some kind of shape, he made a deliberate effort to revitalize his country roots, and those are in fact the same roots that most of today's musical folk-poets Chicago-born John Prine is es fine a representative of the genre as we have today. Diamonds in the Rough (Atlantic SD 7240) is his second record and second albums are often disappointing if the first has been a success. In Prine's case the first most definitely was a success, at least critically, and the second—while perhaps not quite so consistently appealing, is nonetheless a most attractive album indeed.

Prine is firmly in the Woody Guthrie/Dylan tradition of the populist protestor. He deals straightforwardly with such issues as drugs and Vietnam, and he does so within a ruddily rudimentary, Kentucky-country idiom. The music itself is four-square, short-phrased ballad stuff, plunked out functionally on Prine's acoustic guitar and backed by an always discreet, never slick set of sidemen.

Prine's baritone is hoarse and limited, but, he shapes his vocal lines with a nice conviction, and there is at least an easy resonance at the bottom end. In all, the music is certainly an acceptable conveyor of his poetic message, and often rather more than that; Prine works securely within tradition, which is as much a strength as it is a limitation, but he does show a good deal of short-range originality within that context.

But it is as a musical poet that Prine owes his reputation. The topical material is certainly effective — "Robert the sailor" comes home from Vietnam, asks his parents to "Take the star out of the window/And let my conscience take a rest"; and he then "made an Oriental waitress/His own home comin queen." Yet what makes Prine so appealing is the depth and breadth of his concerns. There are humorous songs, love-lost songs, harddrinking songs, wanderlust songs, and songs that neatly cross over several categories at once.

Above all it is his poetic imagination and metaphorical suggestiveness that enrich his work: "Now he loved every girl/In this curly headed world"; "The waitress yelled at me/And so did the food"; "I knew a girl who was almost a lady/She had way with all the men in her life/Every inch of her blossomed in beauty/And she was born on the fourth of July."

John Fahey is something of an instrumental equivalent to Prine; he is certainly as talented, and if anything even more idiosyncratic. Fahey is an acoustic guitarist, and a masterful one. He works from a blues base, but he combines an extraordinarily diverse blend of influences and personal passions into his own, unique style, above all a background in classical, music and a scholarly concern with blues giants (he holds a Masters from UCLA, with thesis on Charley Patton).

Fahey has had a varied career, from Takoma Park, Md., where he was born, to Berkeley to Venice (Calif.) to various excursions into the South. His first record came out on his own obscure Takoma label in 1958, and was followed by ten others on that label, records that won an increasingly enthusiastic underground reputation. Now he has appeared for the first time on a major label, and the album, Of Rivers and Religion (Reprise MS 2089) should bring his artistry to a wider audience at last.

The record is billed as "A Takoma Production" and it is characteristic of his work (the so-called "orchestra" of the jacket consists of a few deferential accompanists). The influences here are predominantly river-boat blues, but Fahey's personal style shines easily through. He plays—always with impeccably clean, full-toned security — in a predominantly slow, comfortable tempo, arpeggiated chords strung out repetitively, each song stretched, for all its rhythmical allure, into a timeless continuum. Fahey's music is "head music"no doubt about it, but it can most definitely be enjoyed without dope, just as the best of most any specialized art can be appreciated by a more general public.

Bruce Springsteen's debut album, Greetings from Asbury Park, N. J. (Columbia KC 31903) is full of urban experience, despite the country flavor of its musical idiom. Springsteen sometimes sounds like a curious cross between Van Morrison's upbeat fraternity-party enthusiasm and a bit of Rod Stewart's hoarse rock fervor. His music has an attractively driving infectiousness about it, particularly the fast numbers. But once again it is the words that distinguish him, for better or, perhaps, for worse.

If Prine comes over as an American-rural Dylan Thomas, Springsteen is a latterday Allen Ginsberg, and more particularly the Ginsberg of "Howl", with its high-pressure, crazily juxtaposed rushes of poetic imagery. Bob Dylan's verse once more comes to mind, but the sensibility here is a more deliberately bizarre one, ever so slightly impressed with its own wickedness. If you loved "El Topo", if teenage rhapsodizing does it for you, then this record may turn you on. Even so you still might like it.

J. J. Cale comes from Oklahoma, and anybody who enjoys Leon Russell will prob ably find Cale's Really (Shelter WW 8912) attractive. Songwriters are not always ideally persuasive interpreters of their own material; Cale has had success as a songwriter for others, but comes over here as a suggestively gutsy singer with tight, unfussy arrangements.

Kenny Rankin and Eric Justin Kaz are both from New York. Kaz has had a good deal of success as a songwriter, and Tracy Nelson and Bonnie Raitt, both of whom have recorded his songs, appear in background roles on his If You're Lonely (Atlantic SD 7246). Kaz sings with some style, albeit in pleasantly unimpressive baritone, and his songs are unquestionably good ones. But this record doesn't really convince one that he shouldn't leave the performing to others.

Rankin enjoyed a good deal of success before he succumbed to speed. He has now reemerged, thanks to Phoenix House, a drug rehabilitation community, and his Like a Seed (Little David LD 1003) marks his return to public life. Rankin is a lyrical pop tenor, and his work recalls both James Taylor and Crosby, Stills and Nash. It will undoubtedly appeal to some who like soft, polished rock; others will find it derivative, for all its wellmeaning sincerity of purpose
