---
title: "Boss-Ism; Fervent Faithful Line Up To Buy Springsteen's New Live Album"
author: "Sarah Snyder"
source: "Boston Globe"
date: "1986-11-11"
category: "Commentary"
---

Ed Cronin has seen 23 Bruce Springsteen concerts. He calls himself a "pretty much typical" fan, and he and hundreds more of them stood in record store lines around the city yesterday waiting for a copy of The Boss's first authorized live album.

"Bruce Springsteen & the E Street Band: Live 1975-85" was selling to a 67-year-old grandfather, a 16-year-old Cambridge high school student, a 29- year-old Beth Israel Hospital psychiatrist and practically everyone in between. They queued up as 1.7 million copies of the album arrived at 2,500 stores nationwide yesterday morning in the largest initial shipment of a record ever.

For each person willing to describe how great they think Springsteen is, there was someone else ready to say he was much better than that.

"He's second -- after Elvis", said Ross McLellan, a bartender at Legal Seafood in Cambridge who got one of the first albums unpacked at 10:30 a.m. at Strawberries Records & Tapes downtown on Washington Street.

"Bruce is the greatest live performer in the history of rock 'n' roll", Cronin corrected him, dismissing the Beatles as "famous for their 28-minute shows."

"He's the best entertainment ever seen. Nobody compares with him", declared Boston University junior Nancy Lynch, on the check- out line at Strawberries in Kenmore Square. Lynch saw Springsteen last January after trying "since fifth grade" to get a concert ticket.

Strawberries at Downtown Crossing ordered 300 albums, 300 cassettes and 200 compact discs. The Coop in Harvard Square ordered 1,000 cassettes, 750 albums and 300 compact discs, and had sold about 200 in two hours. Bobby Hall, pop music buyer for the Coop, said only "This Year's Model" by Elvis Costello, which sold 1,000 copies in his store in a single week in 1978, could compare with the popularity of Springsteen's live album. Store managers from New Jersey to California said the pace of sales for the record was unprecedented.

"It was unbelievable. We had a long line waiting when we opened", said Gene Pembleton of Peaches Records & Tapes in suburban Richmond, Va.

"We've never had people waiting outside to buy an album", said Kenny Altman, manager of Tower Records in New York's Greenwich Village, where 25 people queued up for Bruce along Broadway.

Several Boston stores said they planned to reorder as often as needed to keep up with demand through Christmas. Hall said the only prospective shortage is in compact discs.

Even fans who already have all of Springsteen's songs, including bootleg copies, stood in line yesterday. Mark Bowlan, a psychiatrist at Beth Israel Hospital, is a determined fan who once met someone in an alley to buy a bootleg tape of Springsteen outtakes called "Fire on the Fingertips", after first showing an ID to prove he wasn't a cop. Bowlan likes Springsteenbecause, "he identified a lot of conflicts people go through as they mature: the hopes, the desires, the failures and the acceptance of the in-between that comes with adulthood."

Bowlan planned to record the new album on cassette and "blast it" in his car.

"I don't think the other people in my building could take it at the volume I like it", he said.

Not only young people were on line yesterday. Grandmothers and grandfathers waited, and no one seemed surprised.

Nelson Boyd, 67, wanted a copy for his handicapped son. An elderly womanfrom Danvers bought one for her 15-year-old grandson for Christmas ("I like Neil Diamond, myself", she said.) Springsteen describes the creation of the 5-record album, recorded from concerts in Los Angeles Coliseum, Meadowlands Arena and Giants Stadium in New Jersey, and the Roxy in Los Angeles, among others, in an introduction to the booklet of lyrics inside.

"In November '85, Jon Landau sent a four-song cassette of 'Born in the USA''Seeds', 'The River' and 'War' down to my house with a note attached saying he 'thought we might have something here.' Over the following months we listened to 10 years of tapes, the music did the talkin', and this album and its story began to emerge. We hope you have as much fun with it as we did."

Springsteen's record album, "Born in the USA", sold 17 million copies, Columbia Records' all-time best seller. The biggest selling record album ever is Michael Jackson's "Thriller", a 35-million seller for CBS. No box-set album has ever sold 1 million copies.
