---
title: "Bruce Springsteen The New Glory Days"
author: "Steve Morse"
source: "Boston Globe"
date: "1992-03-29"
category: "Album Review"
---

In some respects, Bruce Springsteen is no different from most of his generation. Where he once dreamed of fast cars and fast times, he now has children and adult responsibilities. The changes have come swiftly in recent years -- a new wife, two children, a new home in Beverly Hills. But rest assured, he has not forsaken rock 'n' roll, nor does he show the slightest sign of burnout.

Springsteen, 43, is still grappling with demons, still rolling the dice, still facing the darkness -- and still coming out on top. Witness the excellence of his two new albums, "Human Touch" and "Lucky Town", to be released simultaneously on Tuesday.

It's a veritable bonanza from the Boss, one that should keep radio programmers and fans sated for the rest of the year. Both records appear loaded with hits, though "Lucky Town" is the superior disc -- and indeed, may be the most personal record of his career, addressing his new family-man status.

Each album is surprisingly well-balanced, combining rock, R & B and hints of country. Contrary to rumor, he did not make one a followup to the extroverted, hard-rocking (and 12-million-selling) "Born in the U.S.A.", nor the other a sequel to the introverted, 3-million-selling "Tunnel of Love", which was his last album, in 1987. In fact, both sound more like two earlier albums: "The River" and "Darkness on the Edge of Town", which also blended his strengths.

Still, there will be intense interest in differentiating the two new records (it might have been wiser to release a double album). The simplest conclusion is that "Human Touch", made in 1990, is a bit more uptempo and driven by studio craft, while "Lucky Town", made in 1991, is more soulful and seems closer to Springsteen's heart.

Without a doubt, "Lucky Town" will have the more lasting impact. It kicks off with the recent single, "Better Days" -- and that's the weakest track on it.

The song rides the upsweep of Springsteen's new life, and also signals his more guitar-oriented sound (completely absent is E Street Band saxophonist Clarence Clemons, whose presence was so essential to many a past Springsteen song). But it lacks the depth found elsewhere.

The most joyful cut is "Living Proof", a driving, Bob Seger-style rocker that Springsteen wrote after the birth of his son, Evan James. The mood is inspirational:

_Well now on a summer night in a dusky room Comes a little piece of the Lord's undying light Crying like he swallowed the fiery moon In his mother's arms it was all the beauty I could take Like the missing words to some prayer that I could never make In a world so hard and dirty so fouled and confused Searching for a little bit of God's mercy I found living proof_

Sources say that "Living Proof" was the pivotal song that made Springsteen want to make a second new album: He felt it shot him off into an entirely new direction, and it does. Where "Human Touch" is more commercial, with some songs clearly designed for airplay, "Lucky Town" is more serious, more stylistically quirky (the stunning acoustic slide guitar of "The Big Muddy"

stands out) and more immediate.

Nothing illustrates the album's personal tone more than "Souls of the Departed", a rumbling rocker with a Mark Knopfler-ish reverbed guitar and a story line that again touches on Springsteen's son. The song was sparked by the death of a 7-year-old Los Angeles youth, Raphael Rodriguez, gunned down in senseless street violence:

````
His mama cried, "My beautiful boy is dead"
In the hills the self-made men just sighed and shook their heads
This is a prayer for the souls of the departed...

Young lives over before they got started...

Tonight as I tuck my own son in bed
All I can think of is, "What if it would've been him instead?"
I want to build me a wall so high nothing can burn it down
Right here on my own piece of dirty ground
```

The diarylike tone of the album continues on several tunes in a "Tunnel of Love" mode, such as the Hank Williams-like "My Beautiful Reward" (a near- gospel tune masquerading as a love song); the acoustic, Dylanesque "Book of Dreams" (about Springsteen's wedding: "There's laughter and a toast from your daddy to the prettiest bride he's ever seen") and the stately, mandolin-coated "If I Should Fall Behind", with its tender verse: "Each lover's steps fall so differently/ But I'll wait for you/ And if I should fall behind/ Wait for me."

The object of all this infatuation, of course, is his second wife, Patti Scialfa, the E Street Band backup singer who still plies her trade (and quite well) on many of the new songs. And lest you think "Lucky Town" is too meditative, you need only listen to the hard rock of the title track. Or the wailing lead guitar of "Local Hero", a comic tune about returning to his New Jersey hometown and seeing his face on a dime-store, black-velvet painting alongside one of Bruce Lee. Or the exhilarating "Leap of Faith", about taking the plunge into a relationship: "It takes a leap of faith to get things going. ...You got to show some guts."

The "Human Touch" album explores this gut-check theme in further detail, but amid generally bouncier, glossier music. "Real Man" sounds like a vintage Springsteen R & B tune, as he sings, "Baby I'll be tough enough/ If I can find the guts to give you all my love." This is echoed in the equally vintage "Man's Job" ("Lovin' you is a man's job"; the backup vocals are by Sam Moore, of Sam & Dave fame) and the brawling "All or Nothin' at All" ("You just ain't gonna get what you want/ With one foot in bed and one foot out/ You got to give it all or nothin' at all").

At times, though, "Human Touch" does make you long for the complete E Street Band. E Street pianist Roy Bittan helps out, but mostly for light coloration.

It seems obvious that Springsteen's longtime collaborators could have done many of these songs at least as well, if not better, by giving them a more live feel. And while new studio drummer Jeff Porcaro is steady and capable, he's no match for the more explosive sound of E Streeter Max Weinberg.

Then again, the more you listen the more you hear Springsteen's reasons for seeking musical independence from the unit he fronted for so many years. Many songs are about moving on, such as "Real World" and "The Long Goodbye." And the new song arrangements give him a chance to stretch out on guitar, which he does with striking success on the twangy "Gloria's Eyes", the devil-may-care "Roll of the Dice" and the fingerpicked "Pony Boy", a traditional song done in an old- timey, Appalachian manner.

Quibbles aside, what both discs show is that Springsteen is still charting his own path, still raising issues of faith, hope and commitment -- and still addressing them with an honesty that should ensure more glory days ahead.

````
