---
title: "E Street Catches Springsteen Energy"
author: "Steve Morse"
source: "Boston Globe"
date: "2000-05-08"
category: "Concert Review"
---

MUSIC REVIEW BRUCE SPRINGSTEEN AND THE E STREET BAND At: Hartford Civic Center, Sunday

HARTFORD - The locomotive known as Bruce Springsteen & the E Street Band is winding down its 130-date world tour. It heads to Anaheim, then to Las Vegas and Salt Lake City, then to 10 nights - count 'em - at New York's Madison Square Garden next month. That marks the official end, though, incredibly, the tour is still gathering steam judging from Sunday's sold-out stop at the Hartford Civic Center, where Springsteen and company were even more exciting than during their five-night sprint at Boston's FleetCenter last August.

The difference lies in how well the rest of the band has caught up to Springsteen's energy. He's still in a class by himself, but saxophonist Clarence Clemons, especially, has stepped up from the out- of-shape, sweat- soaked Clemons of last summer. He hired a personal trainer on the road - and the results were apparent on Sunday, as he danced with Springsteen on several occasions - even doing some swing- dance twirls - and blew sax as if his life depended on it. The ease with which he interacted with Springsteen echoed the E Street's '80s glory days when "the Boss" and the "Big Man" were inseparable.

Not only was the band more powerful but more subtle, too, with more vocal harmonies and more self-assured soloing, led by Steven Van Zandt and Nils Lofgren on guitars, and Roy Bittan and Danny Federici on keyboards.

Springsteen also continues to add songs - he's now done more than 100 during the tour, including recent additions "Human Touch", "Mary Queen of Arkansas"and "Incident on 57th Street", though just the first was played Sunday.

Still, the segues were tighter and the spontaneity looser, as when Springsteen did some hysterically funny bump-and-grinding for the women in the front rows, and his wife/backup singer, Patti Scialfa, then did the same for the men, all seemingly unrehearsed.

Springsteen said after the 2-hour-and-45-minute show that he's pleased with the "presentness" of the E Street Band and its willingness to "recommit." And while he hedged his bets on future plans, he said he expected to work with the band again, though he also said he has some acoustic songs he wants to attend to.

Sunday's show smoked from the outset with "Don't Look Back", "Ties That Bind"and "Two Hearts", with Springsteen adding a verse from the R&B chestnut "It Takes Two" by Marvin Gaye and Kim Weston. It was the first of several revuelike oldies, including Temptations hit "My Girl" and Al Green's "Take Me to the River", both added during "10th Avenue Freezeout."

Also in the early going: the partying "Rendezvous" (from his boxed set "Tracks"), the anthemic "Promised Land", the countryish "A Mansion on the Hill", and the taut "Point Blank" (though mellower than his Boston version and featuring a soothing yodel). Then this jaw-dropping rock rampage: "Youngstown", "Murder, Inc." (which simply exploded), "Badlands", and the cocky strut of "Out in the Street."

Many songs flowed together seamlessly, lending the feel of one continuous show. Springsteen got bawdier than usual, crouching suggestively on his microphone a couple of times. But he also intensified his political side by dedicating "No Surrender" to Lenny Zakim (the head of the New England office of the Anti-Defamation League, who died last year of cancer) and adding a verse about the 25th anniversary of the Vietnam War pullout during an eerie acoustic, blues-slide treatment of "Born in the U.S.A."

The peaks continued with "Backstreets" and fixture "Light of Day", which ended the set, leading to encores such as "Bobbi Jean" (with another whomping Clemons sax solo), "Born to Run", "Growing Up", "Thunder Road", "If I Should Fall Behind", and "Land of Hope and Dreams." Springsteen fans can only hope and dream of seeing this well- oiled band again. It was the comeback act of 1999 - and it's only getting better.
