---
title: "Foxborough And Springsteen"
author: "Steve Morse"
source: "Boston Globe"
date: "1985-08-08"
category: "Commentary"
---

Last year, Michael Jackson.

This year, Bruce Springsteen.

The Boston area is the fifth-largest music market in the country, yet the industry's two top stars will not have played the region on their latest tours. It amounts to a slap in the face for pop-music lovers and poses serious problems for local stadium shows in the future.

There's no other stadium in the nation, according to trade professionals, that faces such red tape as Sullivan Stadium in Foxborough, where town selectmen canceled Jackson's concerts last summer, then professed surprise when Springsteen on Monday night pulled out of an Aug. 29 date because he couldn't abide a town bylaw requiring a five-week delay before a concert permit could be issued.

It was also learned yesterday that Wham!, the popular teen group that has been playing stadium dates on the West Coast, was eyeing Foxborough for September but passed upon learning of the bureaucratic struggles that lay ahead, a source close to the band said.

"I would have to feel that under the present conditions that more groups would have to start thinking that way", Micael Chamberlain, a spokesman for Stadium Management Corp., which operates Sullivan Stadium, said yesterday.

All of which leaves local consumers shut out of super-scale shows. The tragedy is that those who are losing are not the bedraggled, glassy-eyed weirdos thought by doubting Toms to form "the rock crowd." In Jackson's case, it was families with young children. In Wham!'s case, it's mostly young, fashionable girls. And in Springsteen's case, it's the cream of thecollege crowd on up to Route 128 computer executives, office managers, stable suburbanites and numerous over-30s who have the money to pay exorbitant scalpers' fees.

In the wake of Springsteen's pull-out, many of the principals involved were in hiding yesterday. Springsteen's manager was unavailable, as were his New York booking agents. Neil Jacobsen of Boston's Tea Party Concerts, which was to promote the Aug. 29 date, answered his phone but only to say, "I don't understand the thought processes of the Town of Foxborough selectmen. This is something they have to live with."

"It's a major loss", added Frank Russo, the Providence promoter who first hoped to bring the Jacksons in and also recently bid on Springsteen. "For any bureaucratic situation to offset a history- making engagement such as this, is a shame."

Where to go from here? Observers have wondered whether Sullivan Stadium might test the Foxborough bylaw in court, claiming it is too harsh a regulation on a private business. Chamberlain said yesterday, however: "We're going to wait and see what will happen. There are no plans to say or do anything. At some point we'll get involved, but we haven't played that card yet."

The stadium, of course, has to live with the town, so such a divisive step is unlikely.

Another gloomy prospect is the selectmen's avowed opposition to two-date concerts. There are only a few stars who could play two shows - Springsteen, the Jacksons and the Rolling Stones come to mind - but with the enormous expenses of their tours they're even more likely to take their acts elsewhere now rather than play only one engagement.

As for Springsteen, the logic behind his cancellation is not hard to fathom.

He has a trouble-free concert record, has become the darling of the industry and hardly wanted the blemish of being "banned in Foxborough" the day before his show.

Ironically, though, his good sense to wait to announce his tour until after July 13's Live Aid concert - so as not to upstage the event - only put Sullivan Stadium further behind the eight-ball in dealing with the Foxborough bylaw. That, however, is the nature of the music business. It is a hectic, last-minute world, fundamentally different from the snail-like pace of small- town politics.

Coupled with the embarrassing lack of Boston Garden shows these days, the Foxborough fiasco only further suggests that the gap between music and politics is widening rather than being healed.
