---
title: "Only the Strong Survive Review"
author: "Will Hodgkinson"
source: "The Times of London"
date: "2022-11-04"
category: "Album Review"
---

An Appealing Love Letter To A Glorious Era Of Music
Rating: 4/5

In a recent interview with the US radio DJ Howard Stern, Bruce Springsteen talked about his prodigious songwriting output. "I don't have something to say every day", Springsteen said in a wide-ranging conversation that also covered selling his back catalogue for $500 million ("it was a timing thing"), the prospect of retirement ("I can't imagine it") and memories of the E Street Band's late saxophonist Clarence Clemons. "I don't go into a room at 11 o'clock and write till three or something like that. I wait for the songs to come", he said.

We can only assume that the songs have not been coming, because Springsteen is making his grand return with an album of covers, most of them soul classics from the Sixties and Seventies. The appeal is in the way he uses songs that — in being straight-talking anthems about love, joy and pain that are driven above all else by feeling — have a lot in common with his own material. The result is a new place for Springsteen's trademark throaty, impassioned roar to inhabit, and it fits him like a glove. The downside is that it makes you wonder if Springsteen, having reached 73 with no intention of retiring but still putting his financial affairs in order, could ever write another song as good as these in the time he has left on this earth.

Take Hey, Western Union Man, a US No 1 in 1968 for Chicago's Jerry "The Ice Man" Butler, which captures everything great about soul: a simple message, in this case Butler imploring the Western Union man of the title to send a telegram to his baby and save him from acute loneliness, allied to a tune that makes you want to sing along and dance. Then there is I Forgot to Be Your Lover by William Bell, whose rootsy, country soul style contributed to the trademark sonic warmth of Memphis's Stax Records. Springsteen has enough sympathy for the song to pull out the regret, tinged with seduction, which lies at its smooth heart.

Springsteen's full-throttle approach doesn't always work so well, chiefly because delivery of these songs has to be believable above all else. 7 Rooms of Gloom is one of the jewels in the Four Tops' crown, a bluesy, baroque masterpiece about the bleakness of solitude in an empty house after a split.

Springsteen's theatrical delivery is oddly unconvincing, perhaps because it is hard to believe he is living in seven rooms of gloom — 77 rooms of gloom, maybe.

In the main, though, Springsteen's latest is an appealing love letter to a glorious era of music when a simple sentiment, a sweet melody, a classy arrangement and, above all, a great voice were the essential ingredients for songs that spoke to everyday people. Obviously there is a degree of nostalgia to all this, not least because Springsteen has eschewed modern recording techniques for an authentic soul stew of clean guitar licks, harmonising backing vocals and symphonic strings, which sound like they were played for the most part live.

It proves, during our current period of historic flux and uncertainty, to be reassuring; a valuable quality indeed. To hear the Boss give his all to Frank Wilson's 1965 Motown belter Do I Love You (Indeed I Do) is to feel, against overwhelming evidence to the contrary, that life isn't so bad after all.

(Columbia
