---
title: "The Midnight Cowboy"
author: "Mark Hagen"
source: "Mojo Magazine"
date: "1999-01-01"
category: "Interview"
---

That is definitely a deer. Fast-moving, hard to spot and not prepared to hang about and exchange pleasantries. Yes, a deer. And it's running past the front door of Bruce Springsteen's Thrill Hill Recording studios, a farm house on the fringes of his land deep in rural New Jersey. It's a lovely old building, combining the hi-tech Springsteen now uses to make most of his recordings with a warm homey atmosphere - artfully distressed walls, comfy sofas, a roaring log fire, a fine collection of horse prints, an impressive selection of tequilas and bourbons. Currently in residence is Patti Scialfa (otherwise known as Mrs. Springsteen) and we are discussing the finer points of Bridget Jones's Diary.

An engine growl signals the arrival of an immaculately restored and customized 1948 pickup truck driven by her husband. He bowls into the room, tanned and smiling, with hair trimmed back to River levels and no sign of the Tom Joad goatee. With none of the 'look at me' attitude that so often comes with the turf, Bruce has the kind of natural charisma that makes a room somehow seem more alive. Relaxed and friendly, the conversation moves to the finer things in life - the delights of vintage denim and old rockabilly records; The Mavericks, The Waco Brothers, The Clash and Dave Alvin; tattoos; the sartorial requirements of the British judicial system and the short stories of William Price Fox.

We're here to talk about Springsteen's long-hidden but now (partially) revealed artistic life, the fruits of which are, after years of fan requests and vague promises, collected in the Tracks box set. Springsteen recording sessions are epic occasions which have been known to stretch over several years before an album emerges, inevitably leaving behind dozens of fabulous songs gathering dust on the studio shelf It's from these that Tracks has been compiled. Initially a 6-CD set featuring 100 songs, it's now emerged as a 4-CD, 66-song affair focusing, according to Bruce, on "songs that were part of specific albums, things that got left off the records that came out rather than songs that were recorded without a particular project in mind". While this has meant the loss of material like The Promise ("I just didn't have a take of it I was happy with" and The Fever ("It was never one of my favourite songs anyway!"), what has emerged is a secret history of a man with a larger plan than we might have realized. Also on the horizon is Songs, a large collection of photo and Iyrics which Springsteen has introduced, annotated and augmented with such fascinating curios as the original work sheet for Prove It All Night and the note to manager Jon Landau, suggesting that new song Born In The USA might have potential.

All this retrospection and, presumably, the death of his father earlier this year has cast Bruce in a more than usually reflective mood. In the past a reluctant interviewee, on this occasion he relaxes right into it and digs candidly and deep, his voice at times cracking with emotion. Springsteen is a mesmerizing speaker, often circling a subject cautiously before honing in on it full-beam. Oh, and he laughs a lot too. ..

The first voice that we hear on Tracks is John Hammond, introducing your audition for Columbia. What do you remember of that day?

It was a big, big day for me. I'd played a lot of bars, a lot of different shows. I was 22 and come up on the bus with an acoustic guitar with no case which I'd borrowed from the drummer from The Castiles. I was embarrassed carrying it around the city. I walked into his office and had the audition and I played a couple of songs and he said, "You've got to be on Columbia Records. But I need to see you play. And I need to hear how you sound on tape." Me and Mike Appel his manager/publisher] walked all around the Village trying to find some place that would let somebody just get up on stage and play. We went to the Bitter End, it didn't work out. We went to another club. And finally we went to the old Gaslight on McDougai Street and the guy says, "Yeah, we have an open night where you can come down and play for half on hour." There were about 10 people in the place and I played for about half on hour. John Hammond said, "Gee, that was great. I want you to come to the Columbia Recording Studio and make a demo tope." A demo I made at Bill Graham's studio in San Francisco in '69 was the only other time I'd ever been in a real recording studio. Columbia was very old-fashioned: everybody in ties and shirts; the engineer was in a white shirt and a tie and was probably 50, 55 years old, it was just him and John and Mike Appel there, and he just hits the button and gives you your serial number, and off you go. I was excited. I felt I'd written some good songs and this was my shot. I had nothing to lose and it was like the beginning of something.

I knew a lot about John Hammond, the work he'd done, the people he'd discovered, his importance in music and it was very exciting to feel you were worth his time. No matter what happened afterwards, even it it was just for this one night, you were worth his time. That meant a lot to me. He was very encouraging - simply being in that room with him at the board was one of my greatest recording experiences.

How did you arrive at the sound on that audition tape?

I'd been in Steel Mill, which was basically a riff-oriented hard rock thing, and we took it to San Francisco. Drove across the country in a truck older than my '48 out there. I was 19, it was 1969 and we auditioned at the Family Dogg, which was a well-known ballroom in San Francisco at the time. There was three bands, another band got the job and we thought we were robbed, blah blah, but we really weren't. They were just better than us. I'd played a lot locally, and for a long time hadn't seen anybody better than I was, and I walked into that ballroom that afternoon, there was somebody better than we were. We played a few more shows but I knew that I was going to do something else.

We ran out of money, and scrambled our way back across the United States - I ended up in the back of this big flatbed that we'd built a box on for two days, in the wintertime in a sleeping bag with my bass player and the equipment. We got back home and I started another band. I moved from hard rock to rhythm and blues-influenced music, and I began to write differently. We'd built a very large audience, sold out 3,000 seaters in a few places down South and in Jersey - an enormous audience for a band with no record - and we were able to live on it. A lot of that audience disappeared and I couldn't keep it going. It became The Bruce Springsteen Band - basically me, Vini Lopez, Steve Van Zandt, Davey Sancious, Garry Tallent - which played initially at a place called the Student Prince, a bar in Asbury Park. But I'd lost my audience almost completely, so the first night we played, we charged a dollar at the door and that was our pay. The first night we made 15 bucks. The next week we made 30 and then when the place was jammed you could make 150, which spread five ways, three nights a week, was enough to keep you going.

Eventually I had some personal problems with this, that and the other thing and I decided I was going to California to mace a living out there playing. But I really couldn't do so - nobody really paid unknowns to play at that time So I said, "Well, I've got to come back home because this is the only place I can really survive as a musician." My parents didn't have the kind of money where they could support you - they lived in a little apartment and you slept on the couch. I drove back to New Jersey and did some bar gigs and I started to think that I needed to approach the thing somewhat differently. I began to write music that would not have worked in a club, really. It required too much attention, too much listening, a certain kind of focus. But I felt if I was going to take a real shot at it, I was going to have to do something very distinctive and original. I wanted the independence, the individuality of a solo career, and that's when I began to write some of the initial songs for Greetings From Asbury Park. I was living above this little out-of-business beauty salon with an old piano in the back, and at night I'd go down amid all the hair dryers and I wrote a bunch of the songs from that album.

I'd met Mike Appel before I'd gone to California and I was thinking, "Well, I know a guy in New York who's connected to the music business." Mike was enthusiastic and talked his way into an audition with John Hammond through John's secretary, which was a miracle as it was. John Hammond invited us in off the street just on his secretary's hunch. I don't know if that happens any more but it was pretty amazing just to get in the door.

I had to have some slightly bigger idea about the music I was going to make, some different context. I'd always had a band but I also wrote acoustically on the side quite often, and occasionally I'd play that music in local coffee houses. But I focused on it and committed to it in a way that I hadn't before. I'd stopped working in the bars and was strictly, strictly working on my writing, hoping that I was going to get somewhere, find somebody who was interested in it.

How did everybody react, then, when you started to bring the band in again?

I think the record John Hammond would have liked would have been one that the first four or five cuts from Tracks sound like. Maybe that exact thing, and, listening back, he may have been right. When I went back and listened through some of that music, it was a very austere presentation of those songs, probably more immediately connected to folk music. Which is really what it was - the music was an abstract expression of my direct experience where I lived in Asbury Park at the time and the kinds of characters that were around; they call them twisted autobiographies. Basically, it was street music.

The first few things on Tracks are really that in its rawest form. It's funny - Patti never heard any of those things, and when she heard it she said I should have made the record like that. But Mike and his partner Jimmy [Cretecos] were always very production-oriented; they were big Cat Stevens fans at the time and he had these very enhanced acoustic records - everything was limited and compressed for a slightly hyped sound, and that's the direction that Greetings went in. Also, I wanted a rhythm section - I wanted a band actually because I'd played with a group for a long time and knew that a big part of my abilities was to be able to use a band. So what we ended up doing was an acoustic record with a rhythm section, which was the compromise reached between the record company, everybody else and me.

I handed the finished record in and it was handed back. Clive Davis [Columbia Records boss] said there were no singles. So, because I'm in the music business now, I said, "OK, I'll write some."

I went back home and wrote Spirit In The Night and Blinded By The Light, where I moved back a little bit into the R&B; that I had been working on earlier, so I said, "Hey, all right, let me try and find that sax player..." I'd met Clarence (Clemons) while I was playing in Asbury, but he was hard to find, which wasn't that uncommon in those days. You'd see people, then you wouldn't see them - no-one had addresses so sometimes months would go by before you saw them again. But I got hold of him and he came in and played on those two songs. So that's how we filled the band out.

But listening back now, that pure, very straightforward presentation of those initial songs sounds a little truer to me now.

Did you find yourself writing songs for live performance, or a specific function?

Yeah. All of a sudden I was doing some shows to support the first record, and you had 30 or 40 minutes to make an impression, which was something I knew how to do because I'd been doing it for a very long time. I began to try to incorporate the acoustic music and ideas with what I'd learned leading a band for 10 years or so. And that's how the second record came to be. I said, "Well I want to hold onto these characters, this point of view and this writing style, but I want to include the physicality of rock music, or band music."

The song Thundercrack was something that we wrote as the showstopper. It ended three or four different times -you didn't know where it was going to go. It was just a big, epic show-ender that was meant to leave the audience gasping a little bit for their breath - "Hey, who was that guy? That was pretty good..." That was Rosalita's predecessor; later on, Rosalita began to fill that spot in the show and held it for many, many years, probably the best song I ever wrote for that particular job. Before that, Thundercrack had the same function. It was meant to make you nuts, and that's why I wanted to get that sang on this record. It was one of the few songs that actually was finished when I went and found it. I listened to it, and it seemed like it was so long and the guitar didn't sound right; I just said, This is going to be too much work." It was meant to be played live in front of an audience and when we plunked our way through it in the studio, at first it just didn't feel right. But it was probably about 80 per cent done - we had to shape it a little bit, but I wanted to get that on because if you were a really early, early fan, that was the song that was a big hallmark at shows at the time. But I found a version which was actually pretty good, called up Vini Lopez and I said, Vini, I have some singing for you to do" and Vini - he's a caddy master at a golf course - he just comes by and I said, "Remember this song? He came in and sang all his parts completely unprompted, like he remembered it exactly from 25 years ago. We put the same harmonies we used at that time and finished it up a little bit.

Do you think people will be surprised when they see all this unreleased material, this whole other Bruce Springsteen?

It depends how closely you followed what I've done. Many of the songs we played early in concert - we played Santa Ana all the same. When I went on the road, I took the point of view I developed on my first record and I began to just write with the band in mind, with the idea of mixing those two things. We cut them all and at the time they didn't get on, probably because there was a limited amount of time you could put on a record, only about 36 or 40 minutes tops, and so things just didn't get on because there wasn't enough room, or you didn't think you sang that one that well, or the band didn't play that one that well, or you wanted to mess around with the writing some more.

Zero & Blind Terry was a big song we played live all the time and Santa Ana, Seaside Bar Sang, Thundercrack were from that particular period. Max [Weinberg, E Street band drummer] came by when we were mixing the stuff, and it was fun watching Max listening to Vini's drumming. Vini was a very eccentric drummer. But when you went back and listened, he prayed really great. The band at that point, we were folk musicians. With the exception of Danny (Federici), who had taken accordion lessons, there wasn't any real formal training. People played very personally and very eccentrically, and if you listen to those cuts from The Wild, The Innocent, the band playing is very unusual. It's a little carnie band. You hear the influences which Danny had a lot to do with - the boardwalk, the accordion, the atmosphere from the lyric writing which came out of that particular environment. And then you hear people who have probably really never heard themselves play that much, and so they're just playing how they play, not playing like this guy or that guy. Garry's playing is all over the place on the bass, Vini's all over the drums. We had come out of a band that had jammed a lot, so when I put the band together as an ensemble, they had this tendency to want to play and play and play. Vini's style was quite beautiful and very responsive and just totally original. It only lasted for a very brief period. The next record was Born To Run and it was immediately less eccentric.

And took much longer to record?

Yeah. The first record took three weeks. My recollection was the second record and the music from that record that's on Tracks took two months, three months tops. And that was not recording solidly. Previously we'd played what you played on stage or in a room for John Hammond. But Born To Run was the first time I went in to use the studio as a tool and not in an attempt to replicate the sound of when we played.

That approach is basically what Phil Spector did. When he put that kind of snare sound together in the studio, that was the only place it existed, unless you play in a big armoury or high school gymnasium on a Saturday night. I'd gotten into the idea of production and was interested in doing that myself in some fashion. And that took a long time because no one really knew how to get the sounds. I liked to put everything on, but then I couldn't understand why the guitar sounds so small. The guitar sounded small because there was 20 other things on there competing for space. For a really big guitar sound, you just have a guitar with not that many other things. It took about 10 years to figure this out.

So when we went in to cut Born To Run, writing it was very difficult, then recording it and getting a sound that approximated to what I wanted was very difficult. I was striving for something very specific that I didn't know how to get. So I had to spend time finding it. There were two outtakes from Born To Run: Linda Let Me Be The One is on Tracks, and there was another one called Walking in The Street which I would have liked to have put on but I couldn't find the master. We searched and searched. It might have been simply recorded over, because in those days, if something wasn't going to make it, you're going to need that tape so you recorded something else over the top. The cut Born To Run took about six months. The rest took maybe another six. I went in and I had my eight songs; I knew these were the songs the record was going to comprise. I took each song and worked on it very, very intensely, lyrically and musically - that's all we did was shape those eight pieces of music.

By the time we got to Darkness the stakes had changed. They had gotten a lot higher. All of a sudden I had an audience. I hadn't really had one - just a little grassroots audience. The first record, I asked Mike, "How many did we sell?" "Well, he says, "About 23,000." He was disappointed, but I said, "We did? Wow!" It was a shock to me that there were 23,000 people I didn't know who had gone out and bought the music that we'd made. I felt that was a great success, and the second record did probably about the same. But then when the third record hit all of a sudden, we had a real audience that the record company took notice of. All of a sudden you're being watched a lot more closely; all of a sudden your actions have implications. I began to think about who I was and where I came from. It was a disorienting moment but it's also one of those moments when you either find yourself on your feet or you get lost and maybe don't find your way back. I took a very close, hard look at who I wanted to be and what I wanted to do and what was important to me. And then I got involved in a lawsuit to get the rights back to my music and control of my creative life, which went on for a long time.

So this long period went, and then when I went in to make Darkness I had very specific ideas of the record I wanted to make. I'd bring the band in and say, "OK, tonight we do Give The Girl A Kiss"... or So Young And In Love - anything to break the tension in the studio. You're still learning how you sound and how to use the studio. So a lot of different kinds of music occurred. I edited Darkness very, very tightly and specifically for that particular emotional tone and a very hard focus on what I wanted to write about. , So, a lot of music I put to the side.

Basically the second half of the first CD of Tracks were all things that occurred off the Darkness On The Edge Of Town. There were things that might have fit but we didn't have the time, and other things that were just terrific but would have been very out of context on that particular record, like to Give The Girl A Kiss or So Young And In Love, which were great bar party songs. I didn't even know that Give The Girl A Kiss existed - wow that's pretty, that's fun..And So Young And In Love - a full band, beautiful ensemble club playing, very exciting. Meant to blow your head off.

It seems to me that at about the same time your writing changed; up to Darkness you had characters that were going somewhere, trying to get out of this community, for whatever reason. To some degree it seems the rest of your career has been spent trying to get them back in.

Those were the questions that came up for me at that particular time. Initially you're in search of a certain freedom - you want some sense of control of the arc your life is gonna take. You grew up in a particular environment, you had a very particular place you were gonna fit into, so your initial thrust is to explode those limits for yourself. That was what music offered in general: you were the guy getting up at 11 or 12 and going to bed at three, four or five in the morning and I liked that kind of life. Then when I found I had an audience, all of a sudden I had a lot of personal freedom, I thought, "What do I want to do with this?" I had seen enough people who had come before me to know that this point was where lots of people lost track of the essential things that made their music vital and made it move forward. I always say I picked up the guitar because I wanted to speak to you. And the irony is that moment, when you have an audience, is when you are separated and isolated. How you handle it from that point on has a lot to do with the course your music takes.

I had a while to-throw those ideas around because I couldn't record for a couple of years. I was living on a farm in Holmdel, New Jersey. I went out and I played in the bars at night, and we toured a little when we could to try and keep everything going. And I thought a lot about what kind of record I was gonna wanna make when I had the chance to record again. That is probably why some of these songs got let off, because they were a lot of fun but there was a moment when I said, "I need to identify myself at this particular moment." We'd had the success, then I disappeared for a couple of years. You pick up the papers and just read these 'Whatever happened-to?' articles, that's not fun, ha ha. So finally, when I got to record again, I needed to identify myself and exactly what I wanted to write about: where was I going, where was I going to in my audience's life... It was the central moment when my writing took a fundamental turn - which has continued for the rest of my work.

Does that mean that to one degree or another you were actually writing about yourself the whole time?

You're always writing about yourself: not literally or specifically, but there's got to be some part of you in everything. No matter how you may choose a story or a set of characters that you may have had no experience with, the job is to connect and create understanding, to see yourself in them and have your audience do so too. You try to find that place where there's a fundamental human commonality around very basic issues of work, faith, hope, family, desperation, exuberation, joy. The song always fails unless you can find yourself in those characters in some fashion and so, like I say, I haven't written really literally about myself, maybe on some occasions, but it's a metaphor for your emotional experience. You're trying to capture a piece of the world as you see it - that's what the job is.

In another sense, none of your songs are actually about what they seem to be about; Be True is not really about romance.

Well, it's partly about romance. Any piece of work can be looked at through a lot of different veils. Talking about than particular song I'd say, "Yeah it seems to be a romance song" - what's this fellow doing, he's trying to say Hey, don't sell yourself cheap. It's saying be true to yourself in some fashion. He's talking to a woman he's interested in but actually that's a device to address, just how do you find yourself through the falseness of some of those things and not sell yourself short and try to get the most out of yourself? In that particular song I think there's a lot of cultural metaphors whether it's the films or whatever, but I suppose that's what that song was about.

Are you conscious of that layering in your writing?

At the time, maybe I was, "The scrapbook's filled with pictures of all your leading men, so baby don't put my picture in there with them." You're saying, Don't lock me into this particular box, I wanna reach you in a different way maybe, if I can find it within myself. It's a love song and then it's a dialogue on remaining true to the things that you think are important. Good songs work on many different levels; that's what makes them good, that's what makes them last. The other thing was I was trying to write something that was really catchy, a three-minute pop tune, that moved lyrically, that linked together in a certain way. And I was having fun using the film metaphor. To me it almost sounds like it was a hit single; it never was but it feels like one - it's accessible, the singer is open, he's revealing something about himself and he's asking the person he's addressing to do the same and trying to lay out terms for a relationship of some sort. And it all happens in about three minutes and Clarence plays the sax at the end and the glockenspiel plays that riff and it's just light and sort of sweet.

Roulette was the very first song you recorded for what became The River. It would have been a very different album had you put Roulette on it.

It was the first song we cut for that record and maybe later on I thought it was too specific, and the story I started to tell was more of a general one. I may have just gotten afraid - it went a little over the top, which is what's good about it. In truth it should have probably gotten put on. It would have been one of the best things on the record and it was just a mistake at the time - you get oversensitive when you're going to release the things. That was a record where there was an enormous amount of material. There's an entire album of tracks from The River: Restless Nights, Roulette, Dollhouse, Where The Bands Are, Loose Ends, Living On The Edge Of The World, Take 'Em As They Come, Be True, Ricky Wants A Man, I Wanna Be With You, Marylou, all three-minute, four-minute pop songs.

It was a funny time, cos I'd gotten into Woody Guthrie for the first time. I'd come off Darkness and felt I'd really found the characters and the type of writing that I wanted to do. But one of my favourite records that summer was The Raspberries Greatest Hits: they were great little pop records, I loved the production, and when I went into the studio a lot of things we did were like that. Two-, three-, four-minute pop songs coming one right after another. So there was an extra album of those things that got left off, just because I wanted a record that balanced the two things that I was doing, that had a sense of continuity coming out Darkness where you'd recognize the characters. And I wanted to infuse the record with the physicality and the excitement and the joy of the live show - Steve Van Zandt was part of the production team, and we finally learned how to capture the kind of dynamics, the explosiveness that we always felt on stage.

In some ways it was really our first successful use of of the studio. We'd tune the snare way up: at the time, coming out of the '70s all the drums were too down and deep. I like the way the snare sounds on Hound Dog: it's high, you're hearing the snare crack, you're hearing it explode. When we recorded we found a wooden studio, put Max in the middle of the room, and I said, "When you hear it, I want you to see his arm coming up and coming down and hitting the drum." We'd built the rest of the band around that sound and it was the first time that we really caught some of the rawness and excitement of the live show on record. In the end I had turned in a single record that was finished, and it just wasn't good enough, it wasn't expansive enough -that was when we decided to go to the two records.

You've done that quite a lot, haven't you? Finished records and then reworked them completely.

Yeah well, it's never over until it's over. Everybody's telling you you're done and you take it home and it's just not right. It's happened many many times. It happened on Darkness - we had finished, I was back in New York City, put the record on, Promised Land came up on the second side, it just wasn't the right mix and then I stopped the record and went back to California. I only spent it doing this, so my life at the time was extremely focused, probably to the detriment of the records. But very often these things were created amid a mess and you don't know what you're doing until you're done.

I had no intention of recording Nebraska in that fashion, whatsoever. It was - not a mistake - an accident, let's say, and, anyhow, at the same time I recorded Nebraska I was recording Born In The USA in the studio in New York, so I had these two extremely different recording experiences going. I was in my house with a little tape-player about three or four times the size of a book with a couple of mics and these songs that I'd written, I wasn't sure where they came from, then I was going to the city and cutting this big studio album. I was going to put them out at the same time as a double record. I didn't know what to do.

By the time we got to The River adulthood was imminent, if it hadn't arrived already, so I knew I was gonna be following my characters over a long period of time. I thought it would be interesting and fun for my audience to have a certain sort of continuity, not explicit or literal or confined but just a loose continuity from record to record.

Is the Mary of Thunder Road the same one who crops up in The River and other places?

I couldn't say. Sometimes a name just comes out, I suppose there's all the interconnections that the songs make happen intentionally and unintentionally. A lot of the time you don't know a lot of what you're doing yourself

In between recording The River and recording what become Nebraska, you went to Europe for quite a long time.

Yeah, I'd gotten my nerve up and went back, ha ha.

How did that change your perspective? On America and the subjects you were writing about?

Well, at that particular point, America in the early '80s, a sense of violence was in the air on a daily basis. It made me very sad: I was 30, having kids was on the horizon. Just the way things seemed, through television or different media, everything seemed much more aggressive and abusive. I experienced less of that in Europe - it seemed more civil, more sane.

The other thing was we really connected with the European audience. I'd been earlier in the mid-'70s and had a very disorienting experience and was simply frightened of coming back. The greatest thing that I did was to go back in the '80s and to continue to go back. It has been the centre for an intense interest in the work that I've done.

Did that experience of going overseas give you a new perspective, writing about those characters in Nebraska? It did seem more explicitly political...

I didn't think about the politics of Nebraska until I read in a review that it had a variety of political implications. At the time that was my most personal record - it reminded me of the way my childhood felt, the house that I grew up in. I was digging into that.

I don't know how those stories evolved, they were things I'd gotten interested in. I'd read a book about Caril Fugate and that led me to the song Nebraska. I phoned the woman who reported on the story in the '50s - she happened to be working at the same newspaper 25 years later, so I called and they put me through to her desk. There was something about that song that was the centre of the record, but I couldn't really say specifically what it was, outside of the fact that I'd read something that moved me. Once again, you feel like you're gonna tell that story and also tell something about yourself.

I think in my own life I had reached where it felt like I was teetering on this void. I felt a deep sense of isolation, and that led me to those characters and to those stories - people I remembered growing up, my father's side of the family, a certain way they spoke, a certain way they approached life, and that resonated through that music. Along with all of a sudden trying to figure out, "Well hey, what if you don't get back in?" I had a lot of sorting out to do around that time. When you get older, the price for not sorting through the issues that that make up your emotional life rises. The same answers and the tricks and the lies that you told yourself at 22 feel a little less comfortable at 26, 28. The older you get the more the price goes up. I was at a place where I could start to really feel that price: I just felt too disconnected, I just wasn't any good, right at the moment that record occurred. So that record had something to do with those things. There are things that make sense of life for people: their friends, the work they do, your community, your relationship with your partner. What if you lose those things, then what are you left with? The political aspect wasn't something that was readily on my mind at the time, it was more just people struggling with those particular kinds of emotional or psychological issues.

Around the same time, Vietnam starts to creep into your world

The late '70s and early '80s was the first time when literature and films began to be made about Vietnam. There was a subtext on a few earlier things, there was a movie called Who'll Stop The Rain [titled Dog Soldiers in the UK] with Nick Nolte, but all of a sudden it began to become very directly addressed.

It began with a strange experience when I was driving across the country and I stopped in Arizona at a chug store and I bought a book called Born On The Fourth Of July. I drove on to Los Angeles, and was at this little motel sitting at the pool and a fella came up, started talking and introduced himself: Ron Kovic. I thought, I must have met this fella, his name sounds real familiar, and he said, 'I wrote a book called Born On The Fourth Of July. I said, "Wow this is a real coincidence, I just read the book a couple of weeks ago.'' So Ron took me down to Venice to the Vet Centre, and I met Bobby Muller, who was the President of the WA at the time. One thing lead to another and it just began to surface in some of my music. There was a song Pittsburgh, which was actually written for Born In The USA.

You hadn't been to Vietnam yourself.

No, I did the draft-dodger rag.

Did you feel guilty about not going?

No, but it was such a part of growing up at that time, it was in your home every single night. My drummer in The Castiles went - and he died. I remember a fella was the best front man in New Jersey at the time, Walter Cichone, and he joined the Marines and was posted missing in action, and on the street people were frightened and everybody was trying to figure out how to get out of the draft. Whether you were there or whether you were at home in the United States, it was a defining moment in American culture. It finds its way time and again into some of my songs. Whether you went or not, it was a big part of your life.

At the time I was 18 or 19, I didn't come out of a political household, I was part of what you'd consider the counterculture, though probably I was the conservative part. I never had any real drug experience, you know. I lived in a little town, and there were lines drawn everywhere.

Is it hard for you to arrange your records so they tell a coherent story; we have 66 songs from hundreds, is it hard to pick them?

Tracks didn't take a lot of thinking. I went in, I found pieces of music that I liked that we hadn't released. I didn't feel I had to arrange them conceptually: I based my choices on what was pretty much finished and what I felt were the best things we had done that hadn't come out. What you find to your surprise is that when you begin to sequence them, some internal logic takes over. It follows the arc of the music: in the beginning there is a young man, at the end there is a guy my age. It ends with what is basically a folk piece and begins with one, so there is a trip that's taken and you could go in and interpret it pretty easily. It's the alternate route to the road that I took on the records that I released. It tells a similar story but you are going down a different road where all the roadside markers are a little different and the sights are different.

This is really something the fans have wanted for years. What made you decide to put it out now?

A couple of years ago I had some spare time, and I said to my engineer, Toby [Scott], send me everything that you have recorded. It often takes so long between records, and I said, 'Gee, if it's going to be a year or longer in between records I have all this unreleased music that I know is very good and I should release some of it." So it began just with that idea and we listened to about 250 songs, maybe more, I made quick notes in a notebook and put it away.

A year went by, more maybe, and I came off the Tom Joad tour and I began to write acoustically again and I wrote about half a record. Then I got stuck and said, "Well, I'm going to put this aside for a while." Then I wrote half of an electric record, and hit the same place. So I thought, instead of waiting for another year to put something out I'll put some of this music together. So once again I went back to the archives. Charlie Plotkin, who has produced many of our records, came in and we sat and listened together and we came up with about 100 things. We sequenced them pretty quickly. I said, This is going to be great," because the mix was pretty good. Then I played it for Jon Landau and he said, "Yes it's great, but I think it needs to be mixed." I said, "Mixed, Oh my God, there are 100 mixes or 80 mixes, has anybody ever done 80 mixes?" We had, like, two months to go. l said, "It will just screw the whole thing, let's just not bother." But when a song that came up that had been mixed, like a B side, it just sounded a lot better, had more focus and impact so I went back and I listened some more and realized Jon was right, of course.

I called him and I said, "Well OK, how do you mix 80 songs?" Charlie came in and we had three studios going at once: we had a studio in the other room, a truck out in the yard, and we had Bob Clearmountain on the phone - there was a system where he can mix in California and it just plays out your stereo speakers just like you were sitting in the studio! That's basically how the things got mixed. There was a fella named Ed Thacker who took the rough mixes, basically remained very true to that sound picture and enhanced it greatly. So when I came in, I was not hearing something unfamiliar. For the fans who'd heard these things, it's just a very different presentation of the music, much more fully realized and powerful.

One of the pleasures is actually tracking the evolution of some of the material; Santa Ana has got a couple of lines that crop up in She's The One, and Living On The Edge Of The World is Open All Night, effectively.

If you have a good line, you don't like to throw it - you don't write that many. If I came up with a line that I liked I always tried to use it because writing was hard and, for one reason or another, things would begin here and end up there. Bob Benjamin sent me a tape with about three songs on it, and Iceman was one of them. I had forgotten I had even written it and I had no idea what it was, and I went back and it was a pretty nice song. Finding some of the things you'd forgot you had done, that was fun.

Do you really forget?

Yes. There were some things that I forgot I'd done - Give The Girl A Kiss, which was a big sort of party tune, I had forgotten; Iceman, like Born In The USA, was just something that I didn't get at the time that I did it. When I went back and listened I realized that the reason I left it off Nebraska was partly because we'd already cut the band version, and this one I felt hadn't really nailed it. But it came off pretty well, when I came back and I listened to it.

Isn't that the point of this record? That people who are familiar with Born In The USA suddenly find there is this other interpretation?

Yes, well, if you like that record, there is another record here waiting for you! If you like The River there is an album from The River, if you like Born In The USA there is almost an entire album from Born In The USA. You like one song over another at the time, but occasionally your choices are very, very particular. Like I don't know if this particular Born In The USA had been on Nebraska whether that would that have changed the record.

Two songs seem to be very you; one is The Wish, which is clearly about your mother.

Yes, that's risky territory, ha ha. I was saying an the last tour, rock 'n'rollers don't take to singing about your mother. You can do country or even rap music and sing about your mother. There was a gospel group called the Mother Lovers. Elvis, of course, sang about his mother all the time but not directly, so it sort of a funny song. It's probably why it didn't get on!

The other autobiographical song is Goin' Cali; is that you?

Yes, that's me. I was going to go out and play with a band and needed music that was going to fill that straw, but in the meantime I wrote about half a record on the bass, where you had a note and you had your idea. I wrote about half or more of a record. The only one that made it to release was 57 Channels, but on this thing there was Over The Rise, When The Lights Go Out, Loose Change, Goin' Cali, Gave It A Name, even My Lover Man, all these very psychological portraits of people wrestling with relationships and their own isolation. Goin' Cali, I suppose, was just an experimental thing I laid down in the studio one day: I don't even remember recording it or how it came about but it traces, ironically, my journey at that time out West.

It's in the classic American tradition - If you assume that America was founded on people who could not fit in where they were in the first place, so moved and kept moving...

Well, that isolation is a big part of the American character. Everyone wakes up an one of those mornings when you just feel like you want to walk away and start brand new. The West always obviously symbolized that possibility for a long time here in the States - it probably still symbolizes the illusion of that possibility today. I reached a point where I wanted something different. I tried living in New York City for a while and I just was not a city boy, and I had a small place in California from the early '80s on, and it was a place where I could go and I had my cars and my motorcycles, and I enjoyed the geography of the state; you can be out of Los Angeles in 30 minutes and hit the edge of the desert and travel for 100 miles. There is still a lot of nothing out here and I loved it. You are dwarfed in it and it puts your daily concerns in immediate perspective.

You have pared down your imagery through your career. To begin with your images were florid and Very wordy.

After I'd made a few albums, those were the records that I felt uncomfortable with. But now I go back and I really like them, because they are records that I made before anybody was listening. I never heard myself singing these songs until they were recorded, didn't have a tape player at home. So you were just doing it, having fun. So I look back and it was a very free moment in my writing. I just wrote what came out and the songs work on an abstract basis, but that's what makes them fun. Santa Ana is just a series of images, but it works, there's a story being told. But later I turned away from that kind of writing because I received Dylan comparisons. If you go back and listen it's really not like Dylan at all, but at the time I was very sensitive about creating my own identity, and so I moved away from that kind of writing. It still comes up in Born To Run and Jungleland and a few other places but by the time you get to Darkness it's just about gone.

What would the 22-year-old who went to see John Hammond think of you now?

I really don't know. You hear your voice from that particular period of time, and you try to think back to what you were thinking, and who you were, and you probably tell yourself that you're the same. In some essential way you are the same, but of course you're the same person at a very different place in your life. The kid that walked in that particular night hadn't begun to imagine a life with children, a wife, and responsibilities - I was trying to avoid responsibilities, that was why I became a musician.

So I find myself coming to terms with those ideas that I ran from for a very long time. That's quite a change. As you get older you realize that where life's satisfactions and new freedoms reside is in making specific choices, choosing the way that your life is going to go. Those choices seem confining when you're young, because you want everything, you live in a fantasy of endless possibility. Then if you have some success there is enormous amount of reel possibility that is handed to you, a dangerous amount, and if you go too far down that particular road, you realize it isn't what it appears to be. You can mistake endless choice for freedom, particularly when everybody wants to say yes to you all the time. There's plenty of fun to be had, but if you don't sort that out it's a recipe for disaster.

The following morning dawns bright and clear, which means it's an ideal day to go to the seaside. It has to be said that if you were brought up on a steady diet of Bruce Springsteen records, then to cruise today round the sea front where so much of his early work is set is a chastening experience. The relatively modest Asbury Park boardwalk is completely deserted, and almost every surrounding building seems to be in a state of major disrepair. Madam Marie's fortune-telling booth is still there, but the only signs of the once-thriving club scene are a decidedly tatty looking Stone Pony (recently converted to dance venue Vinyl) and a dancing establishment of low repute called Club Seduction; once upon a time this was The Student Prince, where The Bruce Springsteen Band plied their trade. The Palace Amusements building, celebrated in Springsteen mythology on both Born To Run and Tunnel Of Love, is a wasteland of flaking paint and collapsing brickwork, and the Circuit I plays host to a bloke on a bicycle and a police car.

But let's go into the town itself, and more particularly to The Saint, a long, narrow bar with a small stage that enjoys something of a reputation, having hosted both The Fun Lovin' Criminals and The Bad Livers in recent times. It's a warm and colourful place and clearly | somewhere Bruce feels at home. He arrives in the same 1963 Cadillac I Coupe De Ville featured on the Tunnel Of Love sleeve, but now sporting I a fetching coffee-coloured paint job ("because of Chuck Berry's "Nadine!") and settles down to business. With a glass of Newcastle Brown to one side and 12-string acoustic in hand, the mood is lighter than at Thrill Hill but no less revealing.

This was about the size of the Prince. The Prince held about 175 people and it was nun by a bricklayer from Freehold, the town I grew up in. He'd bought the place and he was dying; there was nobody in there. And I couldn't get a gig because I wasn't playing the Top 40 material - it was a resort area, people came out on Fridays and Saturday nights and they wanted to hear the songs that they knew. Steve [Van Zandt] and I went down one Friday night and walked in and the place was empty, about two people at the bar. We said we had a band and would he let us pick. And he says what kind of music, and I said, "Well we just play our own music." We said, 'Look, this is not going to cost you anything, we'll charge a dollar at the door; try it once and if you don't like it, we'll split." So that's what we did. On Saturday night I think 15 people showed up but it was 15 more than the previous Friday night, and so he gave us another couple of weeks. Pretty quickly we built a crowd to be almost 30, then 80, and in a month or two we were close to filling the place three nights a week. We just lived off it then - you needed very little money to get by, you were a kid just living hand-to-mouth and so it worked pretty easily.

The one thing that was unique about the town at the time was a club, The Upstage, that was open from eight to five in the morning - there wasn't any booze or anything, and it was just kids. And because it was open two or three hours after the bars closed all the musicians, after they finished their regular gigs, would come down. In the late '60s it was a tremendous meeting place for both local musicians and musicians who simply came into the area to work over the summer. I met Southside [Johnny] and Garry Tallent, Danny Federici. When I walked in the first night Vini Lopez was an drums, Danny was on organ and it was a revelation because we had good musicians and there were people playing some original music. It was a shock to me. I can remember walking in and I felt like I really discovered something. It's how I began to play with many of the fellows that I played with for a long, long part of my career. It was very fundamental.

Why do they call you The Boss?

It all started with nicknames. Everybody hod to have a nickname, there was no one in Asbury Park that did not have a nickname. My original nickname was The Doctor, because I had a band called Doctor Zoom & The Sonic Boom. In the local music scene there was a combination of original music and, I would hate to call it performance art because none of us had ever heard of the term, but there would be a Monopoly game going on on-stage, say, and other people engaged in disconnected activities that seemed to be part of the show. So that was what I was called originally. Southside was 'cos he was into the blues, I guess, Steven was originally Miami Steven, 'cos he went to Miami once and came back and had on an Hawaiian shirt, and he would traipse around Asbury with a Hawaiian shirt and a Russian winter hat - no one had ever been to Miami at the time. So the names came from anywhere, there was Big Tiny, Little Tiny, there was White Tiny, Black Tiny, anyone who obviously wasn't tiny got that nickname. My recollection was The Boss was a result of paying them at the end of the week... It was never meant for public dissemination. I personally would have preferred that it had remained private.

One of the good things about Tracks for me is to hear the funny songs, like Part Man Part Monkey, that haven't appeared before.

The best part about doing the record was that all these things that I'd taken off because they were too entertaining, I got to put back on. A lot of the things we did very spontaneously, but a lot of them fell by the wayside. Tracks consists of an enormous amount of material that was just out on its own. The interesting thing about the early stuff from CD2 is that I thought I hadn't really written about men and women until Tunnel Of Love. Then found Dollhouse, plus a lot of other things that began to address these issues, even in the early '80s.

I guess Stolen Car is really the start of a lot of that kind of thing.

Well, it was the presentation of that particular guy, of somebody who was concerned with those ideas, for the first time: that if you don't connect yourself to your family and to the world, you feel like you're disappearing, fading away. I felt like that for a very, very long time. Growing up, l felt invisible. And that feeling is an enormous source of pain for people. To make your life felt, it doesn't have to be in some big way; maybe it's just with your family and with the job, the basic things you live for. So to have somebody who could feel himself slipping away from all that, and who didn't know what to do about it, that idea was related to the heart of almost all of my music. The struggle to make some impact and to create meaning for yourself and for the people you come in touch with.

With Stolen Car that idea includes being able to have an intimate life, something that's essential to filling out your life. He was the guy that started the rest of that idea - the things that I write with the bass, whether it's the guy in Goin' Cali or the guy in Loose Change that no matter what he touches it just becomes loose change in your pocket. That's something that everybody has to learn, to find their way through. And after that came Tunnel Of Love.

So did music help you find that way through?

Oh sure, that was my central link, the minute I began to sing. The very first time I got up on stage, when I went down to the Elks Club and sang Twist And Shout I felt different, very different.

You said that at time of Nebraska and then just after everything went crazy with the Born In the USA album you felt very isolated. Did that make a difference to what you were getting back?

Well it depends. Basically, all my heroes were people who had hit records. By that time I was 33, 34, I'd already been playing for 20 years and I was interested in just what could I do. I didn't have any idea that that particular record would end up being as popular as it was, but I knew when we cut that song that it was going to capture people's imagination, probably in a way that possibly I hadn't since Born To Run. You could just tell when you heard it in the studio that it was something. And then you just take the ride, you say, "Well, let me see what happens, and let me see where it goes."

At the time I actually did enjoy it tremendously. If I look back on it now, this enormous amount of exposure is something anyone would probably feel uncomfortable with to a certain degree. But to get out there on the tightrope and walk across, that was a great opportunity. I would have regretted terribly if I felt like I had that opportunity and hadn't made the most of it. it's not something I would particularly want to relive in the way that I did at that time, it's not something I would choose, but it was a laugh, it was at the right time for me - it was before I had my kids. I had a lot of experience and I was prepared for the things that happened.

I have never been to one of your shows, or listened to one of your LPs, without it connecting with something in me I didn't know I felt.

That's the writer's job. First of all, everybody has a memory - where do you remember, why do you remember, when you were 11 years old, and you were walking down a particular street on a certain day, there was a certain wind blowing through the trees, and the sound your feet mode on the stones as you came up the drive. Everyone has memories like that, that they carry with them for no explicable reason. And these things live within you. They are an essential part of who you are. It may be that something happened. Maybe nothing happened. But for some reason on that particular day you had some moment of experience that revealed to you what it meant to be alive. How important it is, what you can do with your life.

And your life can be brought back to you by the sound of your feet on gravel at a certain moment. That's the writer's job. The writer collects and creates those moments from out of his own experience and the world that he sees around him. Then you use your imagination and put those things together, and you present that experience to your audience, who then experience their own inner vitality, their own centre, their own questions about their own life, and their moral life. Whatever you're writing about, there's a connection made. That's what you're paid for - somebody says, "Hey, I'm not alone".

You can do it on stage at night - it can be done just through an explosion of energy at a particular moment in a particular way that makes somebody want to stand up, move themselves, go home and do whatever they feel they need to do. You're just trying to bring forth experience and get people in touch with all of those things in their world. That's the real job, the job that keeps you writing. That's what keeps you wanting to write that next song, because you can do that to people and because if I do it for you, I do it for me.

What are the parts of the job you enjoy?

It's the greatest, greatest job in the world. It was great even before I made a record. I had fun and loved my life when I was 22 and 23, and when I was making my first record and sleeping in a sleeping bag four blocks from here on my buddy's floor, I felt tremendously fortunate. I was sleeping late, I was doing what l wanted to do. You were, I guess, the local hero, the big guitarist-singer, even if it was just doing a little tune. It was a position of some prestige. It was great, it's always been great - that's the reason they don't call it working, they call it playing. It's a very, very fortunate existence and even when we were in the station-wagon and going 13 hours you could handle it; you felt like you weren't stuck or caught, you were seeing places you'd never seen before. I drove across the country once in three days with a buddy of mine. I was 19 years old, and we drove this big old Chevy flatback with the equipment in the back and I didn't have my license, hadn't driven and it came to dark and he says, "We have to make it in three days so it's your turn." He put the truck in first and got it rolling and we switched seats and then I grinded the gears for the rest of the night and we went straight from New Jersey to the Esalen Institute in Big Sur in California. We got a gig there to play New Year's Eve; It was 1969, and it was a real adventure. I look back on it and the hard times just felt like good times too. It was just a real charmed existence, I loved every little bit of it .

Do you still get the same pleasures from it now?

Yeah I do. I think the fundamental thing remains the pleasure of simply picking up the guitar and having an opportunity to speak to people and be heard, writing a song that you haven't written before. It's still a tremendous source of inspiration for me. I connected myself to my world, to the world that was out there via music. You felt that impact whether it was 100 people or a big crowd. That feeling stays fundamentally the same - it doesn't grow incrementally with the size of the crowd or the size of the place you're playing because it's about something you're doing internally, to feel yourself, to feel your own existence and to feel the impact of that existence in your town, in your neighborhood, in the world. I still feel that need; that's my place, that's where I fit in. I still try to do it as well as I can and hopefully better than I have done it previously. That's what I want to do.

And that is nearly that. There's a line in The Wish, perhaps the best song on Tracks, which goes, "It's a funny old world, mama, where a little boy's wishes come true." Almost 25 years ago I bought Born To Run and it changed my life. After the interview, on our way to dinner, I find myself sitting with Bruce in the front seat of his Cadillac outside the house where he wrote Backstreets, Thunder Road and all the rest, and that line pops into my head. Over the years Springsteen's music has inspired me more than any other, often seeming to parallel my own life and addressing my own concerns when I most needed it to. You can't ask more from popular culture. As we drive home, Bruce and Patti's car peels on a different route. For a second they're silhouetted, leaning towards each other in a perfect image of love and happiness. And sparks fly on E Street.