---
title: "Leader of the Pack"
author: "Keith Cameron"
source: "Mojo Magazine #201"
date: "2010-08-01"
category: "Interview"
---

Note: A scan of this was sent to me by Eddie, who received it from Essexboy. This was previously missing from the BTX Article Thread dump, and is now here. I used an automated OCR Process on the scan, and fixed whatever I could, but some errors might remain.

Fill the tank and adjust your skidlid. His muted '90s in the rearview, Bruce Springsteen is burning rubber in the 21st century. With a live DVD underlining his band's undiminished torque, and his status - at 60 - in rock's pantheon assured, he reflects on the things that make Bruce Bruce: New Jersey, The Clash, his calling, "the darkness" and green chartreuse. “We are unique," he tells Keith Cameron. "There's only one of us."

It's a breathless 82° on the streets of Manhattan, but serenity prevails in the Lowell Hotel. Barely announcing its presence on 63rd Street, this beautiful example of Upper East Side art deco exudes the very discreet luxury favoured by its moneyed customers: discerning captains of industry, retirees from The Hamptons, the occasional film star. At 3.20pm, the Lowell's Post House steak restaurant is empty, save for MOJO, at the bar, enjoying a pint of Goose Island pale ale.

The door opens and in walks Bruce Springsteen. He takes the seat next to MOJO, greets Joe, the Post House's bartender, and orders a Gran Patron tequila with a beer chaser. As Joe fixes the drinks, Bruce studies the bottles behind the bar and wonders if one of them is green Chartreuse. Joe confirms that it is not. Bruce looks relieved. "Do you know The Osprey in Manasquan?" he asks Joe.

Like Bruce Springsteen, Joe is from New Jersey, the state just across the Hudson River with which New Yorkers enjoy battles of put-down one-upmanship. He's well aware of The Osprey, a large, raucous nightclub typical of those Jersey Shore hang-outs in nearby Asbury Park where Springsteen and his band honed their chops during the early '70s and which attained mythical status via the autobiographical settings of his first records. "So you were drinking green Chartreuse at The Osprey in Manasquan?" asks Joe, with a knowing smile.

"Yeah, me, a friend of mine and Big Man, lost deep in the swamps of Jersey," chuckles Bruce. "Big Man said he knew green Chartreuse, kept a bottle on the shelf in his kitchen, next to his Cheerios. Probably poured it on his Cheerios. Anyhow..." And he's away, spinning the kind of tall tale involving himself and saxophonist Clarence 'Big Man' Clemons that is the root of Springsteen's Jersey lore, right down to the self-referential nod to his own lyric (from Rosalita, the delirious elopement farce from 1973's *The Wild, The Innocent & The E Street Shuffle* where the narrator's car gets "stuck in the mud somewhere in the swamps of Jersey"). As Springsteen tells it, Big Man persuaded the others to down a shot of the 110 proof liqueur - the invention of French Carthusian monks - whereupon Bruce spent five minutes struggling to get the stuff past his gullet, only to see his pal fill his cheeks and sprint outside to paint Manasquan's boardwalk with his emerald-tinted dinner. If only they had known the Carthusians' motto: *Stat crux dum volvitur orbis* - "The cross is steady while the world is turning".

"Meanwhile," says Springsteen, sipping his tequila, "Big Man decides he wants another..."

Even in this chi-chi Manhattan bolt-hole, it's the jersey soil clinging to Springsteen's boots that legitimises his status as America's greatest living rock icon. Not only does he still live in the state, but in Monmouth, the county of his birth. These days it's well-heeled Rumson, a short drive from the working-class town of Freehold where he was raised, a mongrel product of the state's Dutch, Irish and Italian migrant heritage (his name literally means a stone from which a spring flowed). If you believe in Bruce, you accept the eternal truths of The Ties That Bind, the opening song on his first Number 1 album, *The River* (1980): "We're runnin' now but darlin' we will stand in time/To face the ties that bind."

Bruce Springsteen's mojo is wrapped in the no-nonsense straight-talk of the Garden State. It's instructive that his one period of artistic slough, centering upon the simultaneously released 1992 albums *Human Touch* and *Lucky Town*, coincided with exile in Beverly Hills, where he retreated following his divorce in 1988 from actress Julianne Phillips and then, in October 1989, from the E Street Band (upon receiving the call that dissolved the group, Clemons was so traumatised he vowed to never cut his hair again). But by the mid-'90s Springsteen was back in New Jersey with his new wife, E Street Band vocalist Patti Scialfa, herself a Jersey girl, and their three young children. From there, he set about restoring his musical credibility, first with 1994's Oscar-winning song *Streets Of Philadelphia*, then 1995's return to the political badlands, *The Ghost Of Tom Joad*, and finally, in 1999, after a 10-year hiatus, the official reunion of the E Street Band.

It's long been an article of Bruce-faith that he would not be crushed by fame like his idol Elvis Presley, but to look this good at 60 is near indecent. Arriving in the Lowell's Suite 12A precisely one minute early, Springsteen dispenses hugs both to his manager Barbara Carr and a slightly taken aback MOJO, while the glow from his holiday tan eclipses Manhattan's street dazzle. The key to his fitness regime, apparently, is lots of walking. Then again, since reforming the E Street Band he has scorned down-time. In the new century's first decade, Springsteen made three albums with the band-*The Rising* (2002), *Magic* (2007) and *Working On A Dream* (2009) - plus the solo *Devils & Dust* (2005) and the Pete Seeger tribute *We Shall Overcome* (2006), as well as touring eight years out of 10. He also began to curate his legacy: in 2005 a 30th anniversary reissue of *Born To Run* featured two superlative DVDs by Thom Zimny - a documentary on the album's agonised gestation, and a film of the E Street Band's legendary 1975 UK debut gig at London's Hammersmith Odeon. (The same team are currently doing likewise for 1978's *Darkness On The Edge Of Town.*)

Perhaps not coincidentally, the noughties saw Springsteen emerge as a touchstone influence on a clutch of new bands, notably Minneapolis-via-Brooklyn barbusters The Hold Steady, plus New Jersey natives Titus Andronicus and The Gaslight Anthem, all offering an idiosyncratic take on literary punk-soul that hearted Broooooce in an unapologetic fashion inconceivable a few years before. Springsteen has heard these bands, enjoyed them, and has a view. "I think we skipped a generation there in the '90s," he says. "The decade the E Street Band didn't perform in was the decade where I felt a recession of our impact."

He credits his eldest son with turning him on to the new breed, and Evan James Springsteen made some cameo appearances playing guitar with the E Street Band in 2008/09. "The last tour was probably the first time he started to hear a little bit of what I was doing," says Bruce. "Because it's your parents, how interested can you be?! No teenager in their right mind wants to come and see thousands cheer their folks. You might wanna come and see thousands boo your parents - that would be fulfilling!"

We're meeting ostensibly to discuss London Calling, the live DVD of last year's Hyde Park show, the sleeve of which sits on the table between us. Springsteen eyes it quizzically from time to time, but is happy for the conversation to dart around flashpoints in a 40-year career as readily as one of his own setlists.

**In 1969, just as you were starting upon a career in music, your parents moved to California and you stayed in New Jersey. Were you lonely?**

I don't remember being lonely. I was 19. I had the unusual experience of my parents moving away from me. It's usually the other way round. But my sister [Virginia] was 17, she'd just had a child, so she had a lot more to be concerned about than I did. She was married to a roughhouse - a southern Jersey roughneck - my brother-in-law, who is a great great guy, but was a real wild card as a young man. I mean, he was a bull-rider... Southern Jersey has the longest continuous-running rodeo in the United States. It's a place called Cowtown - there's still rodeos there about once a week. And he was young, he ended up as a bull-rider, travelled around quite a bit with it... So somehow or other he ended up with my sister, they're still together... But she had it a lot tougher than I did, because she was a teenager with a newborn. I was just a teenager with a rock'n'roll band.

I was young, and when you're young you go off. My boy [Evan]'s 19 and he's not calling me every week. He's off living his own life. He calls when he can and we have the usual 30-second conversation. "How's it going?" "Great man. How's it going with you? How's things at home?" "Things are good." "That's great." "Yep. When you coming back?" "I don't know.Couple of weeks maybe." "Can't wait to see you." "Yep." (clicks fingers) That's it.

**I've read that during the period after your parents' departure, when you were living in Asbury Park, you didn't have a record player, and so your musical diet was restricted to things you'd heard before your parents left. Is that true?**

(Thinks) I remember I had one in the early '70s. Did I have one in the late '60s? I'd be surprised if I'd been without a record player. That would feel like being without oxygen. I mean, you couldn't have grabbed it all off the radio. And I was still learning my instrument and I'm sure I was listening to records and picking things up, so... I think I always had a record player.

The smart money says one record the teenage Springsteen listened to was Good Lovin', the 1966 Number 1 by The Young Rascals, a New Jersey quartet who spiced their generic garage rock moves with a strong shot of soul supplication: at his most elemental, Springsteen seeks to do no more or less. The E Street Band covered Good Lovin' at last summer's Hyde Park show, an all-day Bruce-fest hard on the heels of his triumphant set at Glastonbury. These two performances were unusual, inasmuch as Springsteen almost never ministers to an audience that isn't exclusively his, a consequence of his prohibitively long sets, which themselves began in earnest after Springsteen quit touring as a support act after a disheartening experience opening for Chicago in 1973. Or, as he remembers it today: "Initially we only got very few opening slots, because we were very good."

So Glastonbury and Hyde Park were special events which demanded special preparation. At Glastonbury, instead of riding with everyone else in the tour bus, Springsteen donned a pair of bespoke biker wellies, hitched a ride to the site and stomped around for several hours, acclimatising to the event's unique energy. That night, the band opened with Joe Strummer's Coma Girl, a song inspired by the former Clash frontman's spiritual relationship with Glastonbury. Twenty-four hours later, Springsteen led the E Street Band into a more obvious but no less affecting opener: The Clash's London Calling.

"You always try to make each show singular, so fans feel like they're seeing something that happened once," he says. "Glastonbury was a big show for us 'cos we'd never done it and I knew what a significant show that was in England. So that was on my mind. You're involved in an event that feels like it's bigger than yourself, that's very personal to the people of where you're going. It's part of the excitement of having a rock band coming to your town. No matter where technology goes, that won't ever be replaced. Technology is a step removed, an abstraction, from the real thing: if you're interested in the real thing."

He remembers as a teenager seeing The Doors play Asbury Park. "I was excited by one thing: Jim Morrison was in fucking Asbury Park, man!" he laughs. "Y'know, what's he doing here?! There was, *The Body*. And then, there was this moment of recognition: yeah, he's an interesting guy, but he's just a guy." Capable of embracing the transcendent promise of rock'n'roll and also seeing through its fateful deceits, Springsteen and Strummer had more in common than just mutual appreciation.

**Opening your Glastonbury set with Coma Girl and Hyde Park with London Calling were quite moving gestures...**

Coma Girl was a big favourite of mine. I loved that solo record of Joe's [2003's posthumous *Streetcore*], I just thought it was deeply soulful and one of his best. I was under the understanding that song had been written about Glastonbury, I knew he was a regular attendee.

**He regarded it like going to church.**

Yeah, it was a very serious place for him. So I said, "That would be fun to start off with, a little tip of the hat." And the next night... I'd played London Calling just one other time, I think. I said, "London's special so let's kick that out." I always had an affinity for The Clash. They just seemed to have their hearts in similar places as we did in America at the time. We didn't exactly fit. Right there in the '70s, as punk hit in England, we were doing *Darkness On The Edge Of Town*. I believe its subtext had a lot in common with what I felt The Clash were doing. You forget that class was [only] tangentially touched upon in popular music, particularly anything that was mainstream, and I was very interested in that at the time. And so I felt a natural connection to others who were. Joe and I met very briefly, in a hotel bar in Los Angeles one time. I walked in and he was sitting at the bar by himself - it was just the two of us. He looked at me and he said, "Bruce!" I said, "Oh, I'm surprised you recognised me." He talked about a few things, Promised Land [from Darkness...] or something. I was surprised he knew any of my music. I think it was around the time he had *Earthquake Weather*, so he was freshly starting his solo career. He just talked for a few minutes. But that group in general I always thought produced a great body of work.

**Your relationship with punk is interesting. Weren't people calling you a 'punk' before the punk rock phenomenon had become manifest?**

Yeah, before the word became iconic it got thrown at us a bit in '75 (chuckles). So, we were funny. We straddled a certain line there, where part of what we were doing was a reaction to where early '70s music had gone. We weren't given over to a lot of the extravagance... We felt very connected to the street and very connected to our neighbourhood, and we felt very connected to the audience - and we were, as far as musicians went at the time, rather ascetic. We had a hard, hard, hardcore work thing that drove us to these very sweaty, transformative, ecstatic performances that were seared with identity - and that to me was punk when it came out. It was like (makes explosion sound) for a whole nation of kids that was searching for something that wasn't out there, that they felt inside but hadn't given a name to yet. We weren't part of a movement. We were in New Jersey, we were odd men out. As such we conducted ourselves intentionally very differently. My style had been kinda set, and it was very obviously influenced by early Top 40 and '60s records - not so much '70s music. So we were more throwbacks to The Animals and then, thematically, folk music, protest singing, Woody Guthrie, obviously there was always the Dylan thing... But we had our own, more quiet rebellion against the rock excess of the time. That was just who we were. We were serious young men about our fun (laughs), and when we came out on-stage we came out to *transform*.

**Around the time of Darkness... you met Patti Smith.**

She was making her second solo record and one thing led to another. I had Because The Night, which I couldn't finish at the time. Jimmy lovine was beginning his producing career, and he said, "Hey, can I bring that over to Patti?" I said, "Sure, I can't finish it..."

**Why couldn't you finish it?**

It was a love song, and I really wasn't writing them at the time. I wrote these very hidden love songs, like For You, or Sandy, maybe even Thunder Road, but they were always coming at it from a different angle. My love songs were never straight out, they weren't direct. That song needed directness and at the time I was uncomfortable with it. I was hunkered down in my samurai position: Darkness... was about stripping away everything - relationships, everything - and getting down to the core of who you were. So that song is the great missing song from *Darkness On The Edge Of Town*, and I suppose, looking back, I wouldn't have minded finishing it but I don't think I could have finished it as good as she did. She was in the midst of her love affair with Fred 'Sonic' Smith and she had it all right there on her sleeve. She put it down in a way that was just quite wonderful. I had my own variations on it which I've sung over the years, and then we played together at Madison Square Garden a couple of months ago. We sang strictly her version and I realised how good it was. I said, "Oh Jeez, I should be singing all these lines every night!" It was a nice, happy accident.

In rare televised interviews during the '70s, Springsteen the rising star showed gauche charm but struggled to articulate his mission. Like many autodidacts, however, he learned fast, and today the self-deprecating tics that once peppered his discourse are scarcer. He speaks in long, clear, sometimes intricately constructed passages, suggesting a man still locked in dialogue with his core beliefs. It can be hard to find a way through this density, but one curious thing you notice is that occasionally, when reminiscing about a specific event in the past - as when he met Joe Strummer in that Los Angeles bar - he'll drift away from his bedrock rigour and eye contact, and start gazing at a point somewhere in the mid-distance. Most unnervingly of all, his voice takes on a faint resemblance to Marlon Brando's Don Vito Corleone in The Godfather. Then he snaps out of it and we're back with The Boss, raspily chewing through theories and pondering motivation. "My mind will always precede me somewhere," he'll say. "And I'll think: OK, what can I do to be most present. To bring myself most *there*, where I'm going..."

**To what extent did the E Street Band sound evolve, or was it always there with that combination of musicians?**

Hmmm. I would say that your idea of "the E Street Band sound" depends on when you first heard it. After *The Wild, The Innocent...*, to me we sound quite a bit like the E Street Band (laughs). But I think probably what people think of as that sound might really have formed on *Born To Run*. Where there was the glockenspiel, the piano was very featured, the saxophone. Though we rarely use that sound today. The sound now has broadened out. Basically, it's an ensemble sound; a dense sound. It's usually a big sound. And obviously there's a level of intensity. Then once in a while, I suppose the glockenspiel rings in on something. But its initial inception, I guess, was Born To Run.

**The record that [E Street guitarist] Steve Van Zandt says he hates the piano on - or he hated it at first and begrudgingly grew to like it...**

(Takes a slug of water and starts to splutter) He - hehehe! - grew to like it!

**Spoken like a guitarist...**

Yeah, that's about it, spoken like a guitarist! Everybody wants their instrument a little bit higher in the mix, y'know? And we've got a very big band. Everybody, when we play the record back, is listening very hard for their parts. That never changes!

**As you say, the quintessential E Street Band sound isn't how the band sounds on record today. None of the signature elements you described have been prominent on the three band albums since you reunited. When you're making a band record now, do you ever think: I need to give Roy [Bittan, piano] a bigger part, or Clarence hasn't had a solo in a while?**

I'll think a bit like that, but not very much. A lot of the guys are down there in the mix. A lot of the guys play parts that are very important but might be unrecognisable as them specifically. I'm creating an overall sound - I'm not supremely concerned with the audibility of any single instrument except how it's moving my narrative and the piece of music forward. I expect everyone to understand that. Sometimes, I'm sure they do (*laughs, a great deal*). While everybody may remain a little sensitive to it, I think it matters less to people today. Each record is not as solely definitive when you have 11 or 12 out as, say, when you had two or three out. The bottom line is that Clarence Clemons is gonna be on that stage, he's gonna be playing saxophone and he's gonna make his presence felt. But yeah, I will go back and think, We're a little shy on this, and I may find places for certain things, or C [Clemons] and I may work on a variety of things, because if I'm creating a band record people need to feel the band there and they need to feel an array of those tones and sounds. If not, I'd be making a different record...

**Like Devils & Dust or Tunnel Of Love, where members of the E Street Band are present but it's not a band record?**

(*Nods*) Where a lot of those rules are off. If I have that kind of material sitting around at home, I might not use the band. I'll make one of my particularly solo records.

The first of Springsteen's "particularly solo" records was *Nebraska*, to many observers his greatest work: 10 stark character portraits of human alienation and the desperate things people do when life's vicissitudes force them over a line of transgression. For those hitherto immune to the incorrigible romanticism of Springsteen's vision and repelled by the sometimes unwieldly bluster of the E Street Band, here was a double-dose antidote. The title track took as its inspiration an apparently motiveless killing spree embarked upon in January 1958 by a teenage couple from the poverty-stricken Midwest. Springsteen narrated the tale from the perspective of the male killer, who when asked why he'd committed such dreadful acts, says: "Sir, I guess there's just a meanness in this world."

Frustration had been a perpetual motif in Springsteen's work from the very outset, but just as his characters never lost their faith in a better future somewhere and so long as they had wheels everything would be OK ("It's a town full of losers and I'm pulling out of here to win," concludes Thunder Road, the emblematic opening track of *Born To Run*), then the band's star-spangled riffola always prevailed over the writer's tendency toward melancholy. And although the clues were out there, not least on *The River*'s last three songs once you've digested the biblical admonishments of The Price You Pay, then Drive All Night's too-desperate love story and the bald mortality play Wreck On The Highway, you're a long way from "Ooh, ooh, I got a crush on you" - no one apart from Springsteen had foreseen this bleak dispatch from a troubled man.

Certainly, E Street Band uplift had no place in these pitiless blues ballads. But ironically for an artist so meticulous in conceiving and delivering every aspect of his career, *Nebraska*'s existence was a complete accident. It began as a 4-track solo home recording, a preparatory sketch for his next E Street Band album. Yet on coming together in May 1982 at The Power Station studio in New York, Springsteen felt that none of the ensemble versions mustered the same power as his solo acoustic demos. So *Nebraska* was released as it was originally recorded, albeit after a heroic mastering effort by Chuck Plotkin, and minus five songs from the original cassette.

One of these was Born In The USA, a lament for the plight of the Vietnam War veteran and, by extension, the very soul of America, an edgy rockin' blues which betrayed Springsteen's love for the primal energy of Alan Vega and Suicide. As recorded by the band during its attempts to make sense of the *Nebraska* material, this became the shattering martial howl of protest that opened and titled Springsteen's next album and helped propel him to superstardom. Yet the song's full-on assault, and its mass fist-pumping recitations on the 1984-85 Born In The USA tour, without doubt contributed to its mis-reading as a patriotic song by US right-wingers from President Reagan down. No matter that come the electric version's final verse ("I'm 10 years burning down the road/Nowhere to run, ain't got nowhere to go") the protagonist sounds as doomed as any dead man walking and the refrain has become an indictment. As critic Greil Marcus wrote in the midst of the furore over Born In The USA: "Clearly the key to the enormous explosion of Bruce's popularity is the misunderstanding... He is a tribute to the fact that people hear what they want."

Springsteen would spend the ensuing years struggling to reclaim the song, first by repudiating Reagan's co-option, then subsequently reworking it on his solo acoustic tour for 1995's *The Ghost Of Tom Joad*. Despite being arguably its author's second most widely recognisable composition, Born In The USA features only occasionally in E Street Band live sets today, and they haven't performed it in the UK since 1988. When it does get played by the full band, Springsteen's body language is telling: where once his hand was clenched into a fist, today he raises a conciliatory palm.

**Does the E Street Band change the meaning of certain songs when they play them? I wonder if Born In The USA would have been so misunderstood had the original version been released?**

Well, of course, a band brings a lot more noise. It turns music into popular music. People are moved by a lot of different stimuli once a band is there. There's the lyrics, what the bass is doing, what the drums are doing... You may be emotionally responding to any one of those elements, or all of them together. So that changes the way music is perceived and interpreted - and used. When you're there on a stool with an acoustic guitar, your choices are somewhat limited. But when I wrote Born In The USA, I did originally write the version that was meant to go on *Nebraska*. Which was a pretty good version - but it would never have had the impact of what the band did. It was a big, big song and it needed a big setting. It needed to get thrown out there and see what happened: interpreted, correctly interpreted, misinterpreted, used upside down, ass-backwards, straight-atcha... Meaning is a communal cocktail (*chuckle*). There is no writer who writes something and then has the fascist ability to dictate how it is perceived, y'know?! That doesn't exist. And then you, as the artist, can react to your listeners' responses. You can talk about it, you can speak before it, you can play it a different way... It becomes part of an ongoing conversation. A conversation that is never truly over.

**Or you can stop playing the song altogether.**

Yes, and it will still not be over. Because it's still in the air, right? John Fogerty didn't play his Creedence Clearwater music for about 20 years - it didn't matter. People were going (sings *Proud Mary*) "Rollin', rollin'..." They had no concern about what was going on behind the scenes. In other words, once it's released, it literally is released. It's gone free. And as such, even though you're its creator, you are now part of the community that is discussing, fighting, arguing, enjoying the conversation over its meaning. You may have an ace up your sleeve in that you can go out and play it a certain way on another night, but then you're simply adding to that conversation, you are never going to completely define that conversation - no one really can. Very significant pieces attract lightning, like American Skin [written in response to the NYPD's 1999 shooting of Amadou Diallo and released on *Live In New York City*], Born In The USA, and the conversation around them is much more intense and fierce because of the issues, values, questions involved around those pieces of music. That's how it works between you and your audience.

**Born In The USA made you a world famous figure, and you reacted by making Tunnel Of Love, a much lower-key album. It seems comparable to the downshift between Born To Run and Darkness...**

Once you have some success a lot of what you do becomes reactionary. It may become reactionary without any success. Obviously, I had the lawsuit at the time and there were a lot of things that were very difficult. Then I had a reaction to the success, some of which I enjoyed and some of which I was very ambivalent about. All I knew was we had to get down harder and tougher, we'd just got to dig deeper, and that's where the future lay. You don't come out to necessarily negate what you did previously but your current work can often be a critique of what you've done. Now I look back and they were just both really good records. *Born To Run* was about as good a record as I'll ever make, probably. But yeah, I was responding to a lot of what happened in '75.

**One consequence of suing your first manager, Mike Appel, in 1976-77 was that you were prevented from recording your next album until the case was settled. Was this the period when the E Street Band really solidified as a live unit?**

Well, we always played really good, I think. But during those years we had to make a living strictly playing. That was the only place any money came from. And the money would be contested, often on a nightly basis! You had attorneys showing up at the theatre to get it! Now fortunately, there was a law saying you can't prevent someone from making a living. And Mike and I today are quite friendly. I have deep feelings towards Mike Appel to this day - we had lunch three weeks ago. But at the time, needless to say, it was on (*laughs*). So we had to just play. It kept us alive for those years in-between whatever we made from *Born To Run*. At some point I think I had to stop paying people, and everybody was just down in the trenches doing what they had to do. You had to have guys that were willing to do that. Yeah, it was a tough moment and we all stuck together and went through it.

**If you and Mike Appel are buddies again, time really can heal anything.**

I'm only going to walk through the door and see John Hammond [CBS A&R man who signed both Springsteen and Bob Dylan] on the other side one time. And there was only one other guy with me. However ruinous the rough sides of your relationship, not only was he my manager but we were very good friends. (*Brando/Corleone again*) He was highly enjoyable company: very funny, very cynical, always very sustaining. And time passed and he's still very similar, but we knew that happened once. (*Shrugs*) It's nice to sit down with the guy that happened once with for an hour or two in the afternoon and say, "Hey! How's it going?" We do that every once in a while.

**Would it be fair to say the other law suit in your past, with former roadies Mike Batlan and Doug Sutphin [settled out of court in 1991], was more ruinous?**

Yeah, that was very difficult. It was very hard. It was really a big divorce case.

**Was it distracting in terms of your music?**

When these things occur you've got to hone your skills at compartmentalising. And you can't get lost in them. Because it's a particular event and they all go the same way: there's a rough stretch and there's an outcome. Where both parties probably end up semi-satisfied (chuckles). Or not. I've had so many things happen over the course of my 40 years that you compartmentalise and you go to your job and you do your job of work.

Work: a four-letter word that recurs time and again in the Springsteen lexicon. But though he may have romanticised the people on the shop floor, the production line or even the chain gang, Springsteen finds nothing dignified about labour per se. Factory, from *Darkness On The Edge Of Town*, watches the author watching his father walk through the plant gates, inevitably "in the rain", and the song's trudging tempo caricatures the monotony of what occurs within: "Factory takes his hearing, factory gives him life/The working, the working, just the working life."

Work, for Bruce people, is a means to an end, the end being their weekend jollies ("I've been working all week, I'm up to my neck in hock/Come Saturday night I let my ramrod rock"), yet its loss haunts his writing too, and socio-economic conflict runs through each record from *Darkness On The Edge Of Town* to *Born In The USA*. As a boy, Springsteen felt his father's struggle to find regular work and the black moods that engulfed him as he returned home from the Karagheusian rug mill, the bus garage or even Monmouth County Jail ("Daddy worked his whole life for nothing but the pain").

Hence the young Bruce's determination to make rock'n'roll his career, and the "hardcore work thing" that drives the E Street Band even today. From the release of *Magic* in September 2007, the band worked constantly for two years, first touring, then recording *Working On A Dream*, then touring once more. In April 2008, organist Danny Federici, Springsteen's longest-serving musical partner, died following a three-year battle with cancer; after due commemoration the band played on, as Federici would have surely wished. For the final swing in autumn 2009 they'd play two sets, back-to-back: a classic album in its entirety, then a regulation E Street Band marathon. It set some fans harking back to the halcyon days of *Darkness.*.., with shaggy-dog tales of seven-hour sets.

"I don't think we ever played *seven* hours," Bruce laughs. "There's a lot of urban legend about how long we played. We played four hours, I think we did that maybe once or twice and I swore I'd never do it again, because it seemed pointless! I got crazy a couple of nights and just kept going. I know we've played three and a half plenty of times. Initially I wanted to play music that the fans wanted to hear, but then I wanted to play all my new music, which was *Darkness On The Edge Of Town*. Which wasn't as well received as people might now imagine. Amongst the fans, my recollection was, y'know, it wasn't *Born To Run*, it was very dark. The playing pushed that over the edge. We went out and toured and brought those songs out live - then people got them. Before then there was a lot of ambivalence. People didn't take instantaneously to it. Which I suppose was my idea."

**Are you still drawn back to "the darkness", more so than anything else?**

I dunno. Sometimes... This last record we made, *Working On A Dream*, was, I felt, one of my brightest records. I had fun. I wrote some love songs, some big pop songs. *Magic* was interesting, because it was also quite bright but its internal issues were political and concerned with that particular point in time, the Bush years... We work the way gospel music works, and also the way reggae music works or world music, in that the lyrics are very bluesy but the music is very uplifting. That was why Bob Marley and some of the best music that comes out of Africa, music with even revolutionary topics, are so bright tonally. If you listen to The Promised Land or The Rising, the lyrics are hard and we try to make the music transcendent. Folk-gospel. That was a natural way to compose. Then I have records where I don't do that: obviously *Nebraska*, *The Ghost Of Tom Joad*, *Devils & Dust*. You always have to keep a spiritual light inside of each character or else the audience will have no interest in it. Whether it's Nebraska or The Hitter [from Devils & Dust], these are some of my darkest characters but you can feel their struggle to deal with the consequences of their actions and the circumstances of their lives. I'll always move back to that place. It's just my nature.

Our time is up. Thom Zimny has got Bruce miked up and is welcoming him to the other half of the suite where the equipment to film a promo clip for the Hyde Park DVD awaits. After a camera phone memento - Bruce whips on his shades - we bid farewell.

Twenty minutes later, as MOJO and Springsteen's UK publicist sit at the bar, quite unexpectedly Bruce joins He tells the one about the Big Man and the evil liqueur made by French monks, then raises his glass of Gran Patron appreciatively as MOJO tells him of a friend who took his eight-year-old to see the E Street Band's show in Glasgow last summer. "We're getting lots of young kids these days," he says. What, I ask finally, are the chances of my three-and-a-half year old son being able to see Bruce Springsteen & The E Street Band when he's five?

"His chances are good. My theory is, while we are now probably playing for an audience that will outlive us, we are still mighty and strong. I think the band will be active over the next decade. "First of all, in my opinion we are at our best: the songbook is big, no one's passions have dulled, everyone understands why we're there. The idea when the band got back together was not to go out and bang out the old hits, though we do that as part of the show and it's always enjoyable. It's our shared history with people who've come and seen us over 35 years. We also went out there to see where do we go over the next decade, the next 20 years? We are unique. There's only one of us. When we're done, many other wonderful things will be done, but they won't do what we do. And we'd love to share that with you before that moment comes. To bring honour and glory on our band and on our band name: that is the single reason we walk out on that stage every night. The money's good - and no one's giving it back, all right?! - but we're there for those other things."

Having finished his tequila, though not his beer, he gets up to leave. "It's OK boys, I'm not paying!" he chortles, giving Barbara Carr a peck on the cheek. Then Bruce Springsteen waves goodbye and steps out onto 63rd Street, ready to go home. Behind the bar, Joe fixes another round and nods appreciatively in the direction of his fellow Jerseyan. "For a small state, it's produced a lot of talent," he says.

MOJO asks him if there's one failsafe test of whether a person really comes from New Jersey. Joe thinks for a moment, and smiles, perhaps still enjoying Bruce's yarn about the Big Man, the green Chartreuse and painting the streets of Manasquan. "Yeah," he says at last. "They don't take themselves too seriously."