---
title: "Bruuuuuce: The Louisville Review"
author: "Raj Ranade"
source: "ACE Magazine"
date: "2012-11-03"
category: "Concert Review"
---

I never realized the key side-effect of "Bruuuce"-ing until I saw it in person at the KFC Yum Center in Louisville last night. "Bruuuce"-ing, for the uninitiated, is when Springsteen fans just yell "Bruuuce" instead of applauding, which, en masse, kind of sounds like booing. Audience dissent becomes way harder, since the boos are masked by the enraptured "Bruuuces", as one drunken concert-goer in my row found out. Apparently irritated when Springsteen used the word "democratic" (though Springsteen wasn't referring to the political party – the liberal rocker pointedly avoided any explicit political references in the show), the guy tried booing to no avail, lost amid the "Bruuuces." (He tried "Vote Mitt Romney" after that, but that just doesn't have the concise oomph or crowd-spread potential of a good "boo.")

This isn't to say that Springsteen deserves booing – far from it. Even at the age of 62, Springsteen is as energetic, hard-working, and flat-out spectacular a performer as any I've ever seen. It's just emblematic of the kind of sway he manages to create over his crowds.

Sometimes he achieves this by being a gladhanding ham – early on in the set, Springsteen hopped off the stage to stroll along the perimeter of the stadium floor, stopping to invent an impromptu secret handshake with a young boy and to pose wearing the hat of a young girl. (He had a lot of these moments with youngsters in the crowd – if he avoided politics during the show, he still had a politician's eye for photo ops.) Sometimes he does it through carefully staged self-deprecation – after declaring himself the head of "a glorified Jersey bar band", Springsteen mimed decrepitude, crawling like a wizened old man to the lip of the stage until he was inches from a female fan's face – at which point he immediately dropped the act and began flirting. And sometimes he does it through deeply earnest solemnity – he channeled a gospel preacher as he lamented Hurricane Sandy's effect on his native New Jersey, building up to a moment of silence where he asked the crowd to pay tribute to the ghosts living around us.

Springsteen switched between these different personas with whiplash-inducing speed on Saturday night, creating an almost Broadway-style framework for his songs about desperate, sometimes-doomed rock-and-roll dreamers. And he tore into the performances of the songs themselves with equal zest – with Springsteen, any guitar note that can be played with a full-on windmill arm swing will be, and elaborate synchronized dance moves with his bandmates are the rule rather than the exception.

Accompanying him, the E Street Band was as sharp as ever, despite the passing of Clarence Clemons last year. Clemons has been replaced by a horn section of five people on this tour, with his nephew Jake Clemons capably handling most of his solos.

Guitarist Nils Lofgren ripped through a guitar solo on "Because the Night" while pirouetting on one leg for a long chunk of it. And the band put together some striking new arrangements of old songs – the acoustic ballad "Atlantic City" (this critic's favorite Springsteen song) was turned into a full band rave-up, a quiet lament turned into powerful raging against the

It's been almost exactly a decade since Springsteen has played a show in Kentucky (the last was at Rupp Arena on November 14th, 2002) and he seemed happy to be back – in part because the doting father revealed that his daughter, show-jumper Jessica Springsteen, is competing in the Alltech Games in Lexington this weekend (starseekers may want to keep an eye out for The Boss at the arena). And Springsteen found a nicely subtle way to cater to the hometown crowd when he mentioned that while he might be getting older, he could still "float like a butterfly and sting like a bee" – that was all that the locals from Muhammad Ali's hometown needed to start cheering (or "bruuuce"-ing, of course).

The rocker was giddy enough during the performance of "Tenth Avenue Freeze-Out" that he inexplicably started doing the "Gangnam Style" dance for a few brief moments. It was maybe one of the more ill-advised moments of the evening, but it nevertheless revealed the critical thing about Springsteen – he's a guy who will go to some pretty impressive lengths to make sure the audience gets their money's worth.

Set List:

Shackled and Drawn
Lonesome Day
Hungry Heart
We Take Care Of Our Own
Wrecking Ball
Death to My Hometown
My City of Ruins
Spirit in the Night
The E Street Shuffle
Streets of Philadelphia
Atlantic City
Because The Night
She's the One
Growing Up
Open All Night
Darlington County
Waitin' on a Sunny Day
The River
The Rising
Badlands
Land of Hope and Dreams

Encore:
Rocky Ground
Born to Run
Rosalita (Come Out Tonight)
Dancing in the Dark
Tenth Avenue Freeze-out
