---
title: "The Ghost Of Tom Joad Review"
author: "Phil Sutcliffe"
source: "Mojo Magazine"
date: "1995-12-01"
category: "Album Review"
---

SPRINGSTEEN'S GOT HIS BOTTLE back. After the diverse dissatisfactions of Human Touch, Lucky Town, the point-defeating In Concert: MTV Plugged, and the unnecessary Greatest Hits, here he is matching the bravest career move he ever made. Like 1982's Nebraska, The Ghost Of Tom Joad is a commercial non-starter, largely acoustic and a hell of a risk – except that it had to be. And it's stunning.

But entertainment value? Sorry, wrong queue. The Ghost Of Tom Joad's musical content is minimal and uniform. It is quiet. Turn it up to 11, it's still quiet. Small-room production sets Springsteen down beside you, muttering in your ear. Other sounds shade the background almost subliminally; the Streets Of Philadelphia keyboard lowers along, sometimes violin or pedal steel sigh and moan. The aural effect of this album could be restful or downright monotonous, according to taste. So it all depends on the lyrics. Good thing, then, that they're magnificent.

The first and title track is crucial, from its opening yowl of frankly Dylanesque harmonica. Steinbeck's Tom Joad is a towering figure in American literature – the essential working-class militant liberal, who battles not so much for equality as a fair shake – and Springsteen, like Woody Guthrie before him, has written a song to match his stature. It evokes underbelly USA: dossers, hobos, soup kitchens, the straggling thousands on the move with "no home, no job, no peace, no rest". Amid these grim snapshots, Springsteen sets out the political morality which serves as a framework for the whole album.

"Welcome to the new world order", he sings, courtesy of President Bush.

Biblically, the campfire huddle sits "waitin' for when the last shall be first and the first shall be last". And every chorus summons up Tom Joad's ghost, guardian of the people's soul, to come back and join in the fight.

With an addendum from 'Youngstown', an account of an Ohio steel town's rise and slump into dereliction, that's Springsteen's state-of-the-union report.

Then come stories of the citizenry – in particular, illegal immigrants, the wetbacks who nightly throng the frontier with Mexico. In 'Across The Border' a boy dreams of the good life with his sweetheart on the other side: "For what are we/Without hope in our hearts/That someday we'll drink from God's blessed waters." But he's the only innocent around. A border guard describes his work, confused and conscience-wracked ('The Line'). A kid called Spider becomes a rent boy in San Diego. He dies on his blanket under the freeway ('Balboa Park'). The Rosales brothers, Miguel and Luis, switch from fruit-picking to "cooking methamphetamine". It's volatile stuff and an explosion kills Luis.

Miguel digs up the $10,000 they'd saved, then buries his brother in the hole ('Sinaloa Cowboys').

This is all fierce, gripping reportage. Other, more metaphorical lines are crossed too, though. Springsteen, always one for tales of temptation, weaves in a quartet of songs about workaday men on the brink of fateful, dislocating change. In 'Highway 29', a shoe salesman loses it when a woman he's fitting with a size 7 gives him the eye and her number: "My hand slipped up her skirt, everything slipped in my mind." In no time, he turns bankrobber. He blames her; then admits to the something inside him "that'd been coming for a long, long time". Contrarily, the narrator of 'Straight Time' is a criminal who has been 'clean' for years. Jailed by freedom's limitless opportunities to work hard and stay poor, he's about to crack.

The world turns upside down more gradually for 'The New Timer'. He leaves his wife and kids to find work, but lets his commitment slide as he becomes accustomed to the hobo's life. It's only fisherman Billy Sutter in 'Galveston Bay' who actually manages to resist temptation, putting his knife back in his pocket when he could have murdered a man (for racist reasons, as it happens).

Just the one moment of redemption, then. Not a lot of laughs. A plain sound.

Toes will not tap. Yet sheer lyrical weight and substance could make The Ghost Of Tom Joad very influential in the long run. It's a matter of diligent, detailed imagination expressed economically. Characters and situations ring real. Thus, emotional involvement actually grows each time the story's told.

You start to know the arid life of the lonely man in the stray lost-love song 'Dry Lightning': "I threw my robe on in the morning/Watched the ring on the stove turn red." You shuffle your feet in sympathy with the tension between 'Straight Time's antsy ex-con Charlie and his wife: "Kitchen floor in the evening tossin' my little babies high/Mary's smiling but she's watching me out of the corner of her eye."

The Ghost Of Tom Joad isn't pretty but it breathes, sweats and bleeds. On the October tour with Joe Grushecky, Springsteen's long-time minder Big Terry told allcomers: "The new album? It'll tear your heart out." He wasn't wrong.
