Title: Reborn in the USA
Author: Trevor Dann
Source: BBC Radio 1
Date: 1996-02-25
Category: Interview

**Trevor Dann:** We've called this programme "Reborn in the USA" to celebrate the arrival in Britain this week, of the new unplugged and unaccompanied Bruce Springsteen. He's here to promote his new solo album,The Ghost of Tom Joad. And to prove just how much he's changed, here's how "Darkness on the Edge of Town" sounded 15 years ago.

("Darkness on the Edge of Town" (from Live '75-'85) is played)

**TD:** Now, fast forward to 1996 and here's the same song. Think of a combination of Bob Dylan on speed, Billy Bragg and Billy Connelly, and you're somewhere near the new Bruce Springsteen. After this, the Boss talks exclusively to Radio 1.

("Darkness on the Edge of Town" (live '95 version) is played)

**TD:** Well, to paraphrase one of the great quotes in rock 'n roll history, I think I've seen the future of folk music and its name is Bruce Springsteen! (laughs) What really surprised me, seeing the show, having heard The Ghost of Tom Joad, is that I thought I was going to see something rather lugubrious and melancholy, and I've never seen you being so funny and have such a good time!

**Bruce Springsteen:** Oh! Uh... yeah, the show has its humor, you know... mostly in between songs, I guess. (laughs)

**TD:** Have you enjoyed that, being out there on your own, and in a sense not being encombered by the big rock 'n roll show?

**BS:** Yeah, it's real different. It's such a project to have a rock tour out there, it's so many people and...when you're out there just by yourself, basically it's me, there's like five other people maybe and we've one guy who carries the sound and lights. And you can go any place where there's a thousand seats, you know, play any town...You can go out of the way places, you're not stuck on that circuit that people usually run. So it's real liberating, it's light, and what you've done kind of boils down to it's essence in some fashion. So it's pretty satisfying.

**TD:** Is it in any sense a reaction to being so famous, and having that degree of fame and celebrity and wealth that you've had, in a sense, thrust upon you...is it a reaction against what that does to you as a human being?

**BS:** Oh, I dunno...I've probably reacted against that already, so this is a reaction against the reaction, I'm not sure (laughs). At this point it was just the music that I wanted to make. I knew that...I spent about 10 years writing sort of personal music, in some sense, although that's not really the way to describe it...music about other things, you know. That part of my life really solidified and I found my way back to the themes that I've written about for most of my work life. So it's sort of a refocusing in some fashion, extending the work I've done in the past, in some ways. If you take, whether it's the Nebraska record or parts of The River record I suppose, it's really an extension of those themes and that work and it falls in the tradition of a lot of other people's work, whether it's the folk art of Woody Guthrie or Steinbeck's writing. It picks up some of those themes, and brings them into the nineties. That was really...my only intention was to make the music that I wanted to make, and I wanted to make a record where I didn't have to play by any rules. I wasn't worried about how well it was going to do, how it was gonna sell, or if I had this kind of song or that kind of song. I got to a place where I felt like...it wasn't so important to me at this point in my work, whether I have a record other people perceive as a big, successful record or a record that sells a lot of copies or..I realized that doesn't fundamentally sustain you. I think if you fall into that trap, then you're a race horse, you know? You're a race horse...and here in the States a lot of the entertainment reporting is the racing forum. So basically at this point, what matters to me is, I need to feel that my work is current, that it's vital and caught up with the world as it is today. And that when I come on stage, I don't have to play myself, I can be myself.

("The Ghost of Tom Joad" is played)

**BS:** The show is a very quiet show, you know. It demands a lot of collaboration with the audience; the audience has to be very still, not just for the quiet's sake, but they have to be still because the characters are still.

**TD:** You tell them, don't you, at the beginning you said "You gotta shut up.."

**BS:** Yeah, what it is...the people, the men and women in the songs... the stillness is a part of who they are. It's a part of the way they communicate, the silence is a big part of the way that they talk. So the silence, it's not just about "Oh be quiet, I'm playing", it's because in that silence is character. And if I'm doing anything at this point in my work, it's that I'm kind of pursuing character; the mysteries of it, and what creates or what makes a living, breathing human being. And I try to bring those people alive onstage at night. And to do that they need that stillness to live in, because that's part of who they are. So it's an important part of the aesthetics of the show. I've had really terriffic audiences here in the States so far, who have really given me that kind of quiet, and it allows me to give them my best. It's really essential to the way the show goes down... it's been working really well. So for me, the tour is based in the presence; based around the new record... I play almost all of the new record. And then I play things that I have rearranged and recontextualized that fit in with that particular tone. And..it's not an unplugged show, I'm not up there bangin' out whatever people perceive as my "hits" acoustically; that's not what it's about, you know? It's about... it's kind of thematic and somewhat cinematic and based around a lot of my current themes and things.

**TD:** The album The Ghost of Tom Joad is a series of vignettes, a series of short stories. All of them, as you say, have characters in them who you create in a very theatrical and dramatic way. All of these characters are people who find problems, some of which they solve and some of which they don't solve, in American society. Most of them are either pretty disillusioned, or at least they're not very happy with their lot which they find themselves in. Does that reflect how you look at America now?

**BS:** I don't really write with some overall... I don't start from the outside. I don't sit down and think "I got a message here" or that I got something I gotta say about... the state of the union, or something. I don't really work like that at this point. I don't believe... I've said before, you can't tell people anything, you gotta show them something. And the way you show them things is by capturing as much of the nuance of the actual life and living as you can in your music. I suppose "The Ghost of Tom Joad", which I wrote initially with the E Street Band in mind 'cause I was working with the band at the time, started out as a rock song. But basically that was...I wasn't looking outward and going "Where is this in the world" or "Where is this in the country?", but basically it was just a conversation I was having with myself. I was trying to sort out, "Where is this inside me?". So the song sort of developed out of an internal conversation that I was having. And then the rest of the record began to follow suit. Because of the opening, that song coming first, there is sort of a social context that the other music gets placed in. And then you sorta go down into it, into those lives you know?

("Sinaloa Cowboys" (live version) is played)

**TD:** It's appropriate that we should be having this conversation in Texas, because a lot of the characters on this album are from the Southwest, they're from the Mexican border - the border between Mexico and California-, but there is that kind of theme. And you talked about Galveston Bay as well. You seem to be more interested in the problems down here, than with the traditional Eastern blue-collar subjects that you've tackled in the past.

**BS:** Well, I've written a lot about those things first of all. And second of all I've lived in the West for..uh.. I came out here in '75 and I liked it immediately when I got off the plane in Arizona. And I go back very often in between tours, and stay for a while. I've done a lot of travelling through the Southwest, all through Arizona and Southern California, a good deal of Central California. So it was just the geography that always sort of spoke to me in some fashion. I love the heat, I really like the kind of heat they have,- the flatness, the openness...I got a bike and I take a lotta trips, me and my buddies take some pretty long roadtrips on occasion. It was just a really interesting and dramatic country.

**TD:** So many songs almost belong in that kind of Texas canon with the flatlands and...

**BS:** Oh yeah. That's connected to a lot of those types of songwriters too. I think I spend a good deal of time...you know, in Los Angeles there's a lot of borderline reporting and the collision of cultures, and what's going on in the Central Valley...which is very similar to things that went on in the thirties. I mean it's not..once I found my way back into it, which happened through a chance meeting with this fellow in this Arizona town, that I talk about at the show; then I kind of found a way to write about it, you know. So I wrote three or four songs...more, actually, 'cause I wrote this song "Brothers Under the Bridges" that's set in the San Gabriel Mountains outaside of Los Angeles. It's a real interesting part of the country, real powerful...just a tremendous clash of cultures and people fighting over what they feel America is going to look like and to be like in the future. So it's a pretty powerful place.

**TD:** You talk a lot, during the stage show, about your children. And as one middleaged man with kids to another; how much of an influence is having sight into the next generation, on what you do?

**BS:** Well I sort of..I talk about it as a way of making a connection with the kids in the song "Balboa Park",- lost kids, you know. And like, hey, those aren't just lost kids, those are your kids...and if you've got a feeling for your kids..I mean, there's a tangible, physical future right there, in front of you. I think that once you reach that age when you have kids, you're at an age where... you're not..you know, so many people spend so much of their lives waiting to become something, waiting for something to happen, like "As soon as this happens and as soon as that happens, then I'm gonna do and then I'm gonna be..".You know, I am 46 and I got three kids and I'm sort of at a place when the 'waiting-around'-time is gone and it's time to sorta..you can't wait to be who you wanna be, it's time to be who you wanna be. And the children remind you of that, because they're watching you, every day. Everything you do, they do. So you're more conscious of that. And right now, my oldest is almost six, and he's looking to see how am I viewing the world, what are the connections we're making to him and to the people that we know and the community we live in. He's trying to figure out who he is, you know..but they're all doing that. So it makes you a little more careful about...it's kind of time to try and get your act together! (laughs)

("Balboa Park" is played)

**TD:** Tell me about the way you look at the rest of pop music right now. Does it entirely pass you by, because in a sense you have grown out of it, or beyond it; or do you keep in touch with Oasis or Blur or the latest hit thing?

**BS:** I don't really try to do that at this point, I've got a long body of work behind me and it's moving me in a particular direction. I'm in the process of pursuing that. I mean I do...I go out and I do a lot of curiousity buying. If I read a good review or something, or I hear something on the radio I'll go out and..then I just kind of run through a lotta records and see what I like. So from time to time, I'll expose myself to a lotta different types of music. But I probably, for the most part, my work has been more influenced by films and books and...really since the late seventies almost. In some ways I've been going a little more backwards, in the sense that this show is probably more influenced by folk-blues, older folk artists and blues artists, and it's more in that particular tradition in some sense, musically I guess. Its sensibility is modern but the language it's speaking is traced back to more folk and blues.

**TD:** Can I ask you about Woody Guthrie, he's a clear influence in all this, and you've recorded Woody Guthrie songs in the past. He wrote a song called "Tom Joad" on his Dustbowl Ballads; your new album is The Ghost of Tom Joad, and the characters are from The Grapes of Wrath. Woody Guthrie, everybody knows, was the great influence on Dylan...was he an influence on you directly or did you get at him through Dylan?

**BS:** Oh, I definitely got him through Dylan. I probably didn't really hear Woody Guthrie until I was in my late twenties or early thirties. I wasn't really that aware...and then I went back and I listened to all his stuff. But really, it kind of came up through..I think the themes I had were probably themes I picked up in other rock music, like say the Animals always had a sort of blue collar theme that ran through their work. And that's probably how it ended up in my work, in some fashion. Through just working class rock 'n roll, you know? But then I kinda broadened it through... you know, I read and saw films and..but not until my late twenties or early thirties. And then I went back to a lot of the great country music and folk music; Hank Williams stuff, gospel music.. just all kinds of American roots music that was real sustaining for me and spoke to me for one reason or another. And then just short story writers, James M. Cain, Jim Thompson, Flannery O'Connor ...and films, too. American film noir and stuff from out of the past. Things that seemed to have a lotta impact on my stuff..and John Ford pictures. Those are things that were probably the primary influences on my work after I was in my twenties. I always keep an ear to what's going on in pop musis, it's interesting and there's a lot of good music out there. But my stuff is kinda..I'm following a particular path at the moment, you know?

**TD:** There aren't many albums out that give you a kind of reading list in the sleeve notes, and on The Ghost of Tom Joad there are some credits for some books and films that have influenced you. I suppose you must've put them there because you would like us to go and find those books and follow them up like you have.

**BS:** Well, it had something to do with the record in some fashion. This book Journey to Nowhere, I think it sold maybe 15,000 copies in the States when it came out. But it came out in the mid-eighties, right, when there wasn't much of a voice for that...It was a book, basically, where these two reporters took the freight trains from St. Louis I think, all the way up to Oregon. And they reported what they had seen along the way. It's just a very powerful book about American disenfrencisement and people who were coming up pretty voiceless through the eighties, and for that matter through the nineties, too. The political debate in the States at the moment doesn't include them at all.

**TD:** Can you tell me the story about "Youngstown"? 'Cause that comes from that book, doesn't it?

**BS:** Uh..I read the book, and it was just a powerful story. And if you go to Youngstown, it's very depressed. My connection to it was probably through my own kids and my own job, in the sense that the thought of being told after 30 years or so, that what you're doing isn't useful anymore, or has no place, or that the world has changed and that's the way it is. And you're 50 and gotta find something else to do. That's almost impossible..I don't know what I would do in that circumstance. So really, that's probably a continuation of some of the things I've written about earlier in my work; like it kinda comes directly out of The River or something. You have to understand, those steel mills were closed down around the late seventies and..I think they started to shut down in '77 and the last one shut down maybe in '83 or '84. And thousands and thousands of jobs disappeared. Thousands and thousands...People who'd lived there their whole lives, whose grandfathers worked there. They worked around the clock for years...So when I played in Youngstown, there were people who all had brothers, fathers, grandfathers who went through that experience. So it was pretty...it was very intense. But you don't hear that much about it you know, at this point. I mean, I think the population of the city has decreased by like two-thirds. People who left ended up out here, people headed towards the Southwest or tried to get down into Houston to work in th oil fields. People that ran these food banks in the mid-eighties were saying there were people who had been working their whole lives and all of a sudden they were stuck out on the road, living in their cars...you know, people who previously had supported their families and had jobs. Actually, that's continuing, so...that particular song is just a portrait of that experience.

**TD:** Bruce, can I ask you about being Bruce Springsteen "Guru", being the subject of that kind of real anorachy fan worshipping?

**BS:** Guru!? (laughs) Nah...you can't ask me about that..No, I'm just teasing ya'. Well, I don't know, what do you want...

**TD:** Very few people in pop music attract that kind of intensity of fandom idolitry.

**BS:** I'm not sure, I think a lotta people do, if you look around. Everybody's got somebody going crazy for 'em!

**TD:** Have you seen the stuff that's written about you on the Internet?

**BS:** Nooo...no..

**TD:** It's mad! It's excessive. These people are barking bonkers!

**BS:** Well, I mean..you can't get caught up in the manucia of the whole thing,- that's somebody else's business. Basically, I've had a really great audience over the years; people I have invested a lot of time in, and they've invested a lot in me, you know? There's an element of..there's always hey, fans, fanatics...of course there's an element of people who are getting into a level that I might not consider such a good idea (laughs). But for the most part, and on this tour particularly, I've really appreciated my audience. Because the show is demanding on the audience. You know, that quiet, the stillness is really necessary and night after night, people have really delivered to me. So it's been a tour where..I really appreciate my audience right now. I feel I've had a great audience over the years, and if part of them are caught up in the fan thing...I mean, the fanaticness, I guess there's always that element but basically, if you ask me what my take on the audience is, it's that I've had a really good relationship with them over the years and it's been a very sustaining one. This tour is probably, for me it's the peak of the whole thing and it's been very satisfying. I don't know, all the little deatails, that's just part of rock 'n roll I guess (laughs).

**TD:** Every word you're saying now will be on the Internet in a matter of minutes!

**BS:** Well...(laughs)..and you will be the man who puts it there! (laughs)

(Joe Grushecky's "Dark and Bloody Ground" is played)

**TD:** (unintelligable)...the stadium Bruce Springsteen?

**BS:** Oh, I don't know. I've enjoyed playing in rock bands my whole life and I imagine in some fashion I'll continue. But at the moment I don't know... I haven't been particularly close to whatever my rock voice is at the moment, and I think that's probably part of what moved me in this direction. At the moment I feel like I have a lot to write about and a lot to say in this context, you know? And I feel like I have a little less of a way of expressing myself with the band at the moment. It's just... I don't know, people are still writing 'em I guess, but... I don't really feel the need to even look that far ahead. Right now, I'm writing some more songs and I'm really happy doing this kind of show and with the places I'm doing it, and I'm happy with the response I'm getting. The record was received real well and I was really satisfied with that. I feel like I've kinda dug my heels in at a place where I feel real comfortable, you know. I feel like I've got something to do, something that I can be good at and I can be useful. So really, that's my only concern at the moment and I'm gonna follow that wherever that takes me.. I don't have any plans besides that.

**TD:** Tell me about your 'Forrest Gump-song' that you close the show with.

**BS:** Oh! It's a mystery, that's what is funny about it; it's mysterious song (laughs). I had a friend of mine tell me it was a song about the man who wanted to blow up the world! And I said "Oh..that could be!"...it wasn't really a song directed specificly at that particular picture or anything. It was just... I wrote it and I just thought it was funny, you know. There's a kind of sinister twist to it... that's what gives it... I don't know what you wanna call it... weight? (laughs) I'm not sure. It's just a bit of mystery, that song. It was a song that just flew off the top of my head.

("My Best Was Never Good Enough" is played)

**TD:** One final thing, I know you gotta go...You do some of the great, famous old rock standards acoustically now and I suppose the most interesting decision that you've made is to do "Born in the USA" acoustically. You only do the chorus once, but there's no mistaking now, that this is not a right-wing anthem; this is a very critical song about America isn't it?

**BS:** Well, it's an opportunity to sort of reclaim that part of your music, you know? I always felt that it was one of my best songs, and the arrangement that I have right now is probably the best arrangement I've ever had. That's how it found it's way into the set and then I connected it... I put a few things that works thematically with it. You know, it just feels really good. I think its meaning is probably as clear as I can get it.

**TD:** Thanks for your time. We shall look forward to seeing these gigs in Britain.

**BS:** Yeah, I look forward to coming over.

**TD:** And congratulations on your best record for a long time!

**BS:** Thank You! I guess I'll take that as a compliment (laughs)

("Born in the USA" is played)

End of interview.
