---
title: "Max Weinberg Has Best of Both Worlds"
author: "David Bauder"
source: "The Associated Press"
date: "1999-01-28"
category: "Interview"
---

The sound cut through one wall, across a hallway and through another wall to the backstage dressing room where Max Weinberg talked. There were horns, guitars and -- making him a little nervous -- the drums. "My replacement is sitting in this week", the leader of the Max Weinberg 7 explained, after pausing to listen. "No", he said, catching himself." He's not my replacement. He's my sub. He's very well aware of that." This leave of absence idea takes some getting used to. The bandleader for "Late Night With Conan O'Brien" will be absent for about six months starting in March. He's becoming "Mighty Max" again, the drummer for Bruce Springsteen's E Street Band and will travel the world with the year's most anticipated rock concert tour before returning to TV at the end of summer. Let's see: one person, two dream jobs. Weinberg is grateful he wasn't forced to make a choice. When Springsteen announced in January that he would tour with the E Street Band for the first time in 11 years, Weinberg approached O'Brien and producer Jeff Ross. Was there any way he could do this? He wasn't about to quit. No way.

O'Brien's show had given the 48-year-old what few faded rock 'n' rollers ever get -- a second act in life. He'd never missed a Conan show -- 1,048 in a row -- even arranging to appear by satellite from Los Angeles when Springsteen asked him to drum on the Academy Awards. After a shaky start, "Late Night" has hit its stride with the audience and critics. It's a great gig. If NBC had said no, Springsteen would be looking for another drummer. "I love Bruce, the guys in the band", Weinberg said. "I love the history and the music. But the last 5 1/2 years have really proved to me that I moved on." O'Brien and Ross gave him the chance to move back. They recognized the importance of this reunion to Weinberg and to rock history and felt the show was on solid footing to weather the change. Guitarist Jimmy Vivino will fill in as bandleader.

Weinberg is in rehearsals with Springsteen. Weinberg said he's returning to the road as much for his 11-year-old daughter and 8-year-old son as for himself. Dad spent 15 years with the E Street Band, but his children have never seen them perform. So they'll take time off from school to follow their parents on tour. "I really want my children to see me in this sort of mythical situation that I was in that was pretty much over by the time they came around", he said. Weinberg has a keen memory for dates, and here's one he'll never forget: Oct. 18, 1988. That was the day Springsteen called to say he wanted to try some new things and didn't need the band anymore. There were inklings. Weinberg was convinced at the end of the "Born in the USA" tour in 1985 that the band had played its last show; they had worked hard for more than a decade and conquered the world. What more was there to do? Springsteen called the band back for two more, shorter runs but when Weinberg saw the billing, "Bruce Springsteen's Tunnel of Love Express featuring the E Street Band", he knew the end was near. Featuring? But even if you're in a bad marriage, it's still a shock to be handed divorce papers.

"It was at the same time the most horrifying experience I've ever been through and the most liberating", he said. "It was a tremendous period of personal growth. It was the first time in my life that I had been out of a band. It was the first time that I had been given walking papers. Plus, I had a family to support." Weinberg went to Seton Hall, the New Jersey college, earned a degree in communications. He briefly tried law school. He even turned to a buddy, ex- Beatle Ringo Starr, for advice on how to cope when the band you've made your life has broken up. Springsteen urged him to keep drumming, but Weinberg had given it up by the day four years later when he spotted Conan O'Brien on a Manhattan street corner and introduced himself. It was a fluke, just like when he answered an ad in the Village Voice and wound up in the E Street Band. O'Brien had just been selected to replace David Letterman when he left for CBS. He wanted something musically that no one else was doing and liked Weinberg's idea for a neo-swing band. The drummer auditioned and got the job. About three-quarters of the mail Weinberg gets these days is about O'Brien's show, not the E Street Band. He suspects many young fans don't know his past life. A year ago, a 14-year-old aspiring drummer sent a letter about how he loved to watch Weinberg drum. He wasn't getting along with his father and found it odd that he could relate to someone his father's age on TV. One night his father confronted him about staying up late. The boy talked about how he liked to watch O'Brien's drummer, Max Weinberg. That's funny, the dad said, Bruce Springsteen used to have a drummer with that name. He looked at the screen and recognized Weinberg behind the kit. So on a Friday night, father and son stayed up to watch Weinberg, Dad talking about all the Springsteen concerts he saw in the 1970s. Some of the ice was broken. "My first thought when I realized that I would be doing this tour with the E Street Band was that I hope this guy takes his son to this concert", Weinberg said. "I think a lot of that's going to happen."