---
title: "Bruce Springsteen at Wembley Stadium"
author: "David Sinclair"
source: "The Sunday Times"
date: "2013-06-16"
category: "Concert Review"
---

The Wrecking Ball Tour thunders on. It began in March 2012 and doesn't seem to be stopping anytime soon. But far from showing any signs of complacency or fatigue, Bruce Springsteen and his E Street Band were locked into a hallowed performing zone as they returned for the first of another series of mega-shows in Britain. Leading his 17-strong band on stage in broad daylight at 7.20pm, Springsteen poured himself with unremitting intensity into a show that lasted for more than three hours without a break. Folksy yet larger-than-life, grandiloquent yet profound, humble but always The Boss, he managed to combine the necessary giant spectacle with something that still felt personal and meaningful.

They began with a mighty rendering of Land of Hope and Dreams, a mission statement as much as a song. "Faith will be rewarded", Springsteen sang, his mighty, road-battered voice reaching out to the huddled, swaying masses like a preacher sermonising on the world's biggest soap box. Next thing, he was down in the front rows, grabbing signs held up by fans requesting particular songs.

The band played several of these - Save my Love, Rosalita (Come out Tonight), Hungry Heart and others - their only warning being when Springsteen held up the chosen sign.

The middle section was a sensational performance in full of his 1978 album, Darkness on the Edge of Town, introduced as "still at the centre of who we are and what we do". Among so many moments to treasure, Roy Bittan's surging, staccato piano outro at the end of Racing in the Street was perhaps the most wondrous.

After a string of hits including Born to Run, Dancing in the Dark and a joyful cover of Twist and Shout, it ended with a sweat-soaked Springsteen, alone on the stage with his acoustic guitar and harmonica, singing Thunder Road, at once melancholy and exultant. Simply magnificent.
