---
title: "Greetings from the once - and future?"
author: "Paul Mulshine"
source: "The Star-Ledger"
date: "2013-11-03"
category: "Commentary"
---

"If you look at the zoning for Lakewood, it's gonna be Jersey City in the pines." - Jeff Tittel

Sharon Ann Reeves, left, watches Minister Steven Brigham, center and David Jones put up a new tent for her which was bought with donated money.

In the summer of 1972, Bruce Springsteen recorded a song titled "Spirit in the Night" (see video below). It told the story of an evening spent drinking and skinny-dipping at a place "out on the dark side of Route 88" called Greasy Lake.

That was what the locals used to call what is now the centerpiece of Lake Shenandoah County Park in Lakewood. The reason for the name was the sheen the lake acquired from the pine tar from the trees surrounding it.

The lake is no longer the sort of place where kids can party in the pines. But it's a great place to go for a run. Every few months I load my dog Betty into the wagon and we head out that way.

On every trip, it seems, I see a new townhouse complex under construction. No sooner does one fill up then another one appears. Lakewood's also got lots of older public-housing projects. There are plenty of old houses as well.

Housing, housing everywhere. So why are people living in tents?

That question's been in the news ever since township officials began an effort to shut down an encampment in a patch of piney woods just a bit south of that lake. It's known as "tent city" and it's home to more than a hundred people often labeled as "homeless."

Actually, they're not homeless. Most have homes of some sort. Some live in trailers. Others have cobbled together makeshift shelters using 2-by-4s, plywood and plastic sheeting.

I dropped by one day last week to talk to some of the campers. One of them was an African-American guy who gave his name only as Clarence. He told me a story that could have come out of a Springsteen song. He was born in Lakewood and grew up there. He lost his house in the recession and now this was the only place in town he could afford.

Life isn't so bad, he said. Volunteers keep the campers fed during the day and fires keep them warm at night. He just wants to be left alone by the officials of the only town he's ever known.

As an old Ocean County local, I could see his point. When I was a lad, there were plenty of people living in the pines. I suspect that reference in the Springsteen song to "Gypsy angel row" may have been inspired by a Gypsy camp in Jackson back then.

These days, Jackson's swallowed up in suburban sprawl, as is much of northern Ocean County. Will these woods soon be swallowed up as well?

That's what this whole big fight is about, says Steve Brigham. Brigham, 53, is the minister who runs the Lakewood camp and is tangling with the town over its closure. Brigham charges that the town, which owns the land off busy Cedarbridge Avenue, wants the campers to leave so it can be developed.

"They say the population of Lakewood is going to double in the next 10 years"said Brigham. "If that's the case, they're gonna need every available space to build on."

That statement would seem to be supported by the minutes of the executive session of the Aug. 22 township committee meeting, which cite the attorney who's representing the township in the fight with the campers: "Lawrence Bathgate Esquire updated the committee on the Cedarbridge trial. Mr. Bathgate advised the committee there is an outside developer interested in purchasing the Cedarbridge property."

That sounds like those pines will soon be paved over.

But when I got Mayor Albert Akerman on the phone, he said the reference was to a different section of Cedarbridge Avenue.

"The area that tent city is on will never ever be built on", said Akerman. "It can't. It's wetland and swamp."

Akerman said the township sympathizes with the campers and has agreed to find them housing. Eventually everyone will be moved out and the camp closed, he said.

Jeff Tittel of the New Jersey Chapter of the Sierra Club agrees with Brigham on what is likely to happen at that point.

"This land will eventually be turned into high-density housing", said Tittel.

"If you look at the zoning for Lakewood, it's gonna be Jersey City in the pines."

On that point, the mayor did not disagree. Akerman said a planner told the town that it could accommodate 100,000 residents added to the current population, which is almost 100,000. At that point, Lakewood's population density would be similar to Jersey City's.

Why all the growth? Because Lakewood is becoming the center of Hasidic Judaism. It's attracting Orthodox Jews from all over the world and they now dominate the town's politics.

"They vote as a bloc and they get what they want", said Tittel, who is himself Jewish.

That was certainly the case in the special election for U.S. Senate held Oct. 16. One voting district went for Republican Steve Lonegan by an amazing 413-2 margin. Those Hudson County-like vote totals will soon lead to Hudson County- like densities, said Tittel, with much of the development subsidized by public funds intended for low-income tenants.

"They're playing games down there on water and sewer because of the power of the politics", he said. "But the runoff and pollution are going to have a devastating impact on Barnegat Bay."

All those extra cars on the road will mean lots more oil going down the storm drains, he said. That means Lake Shenandoah will soon be greasy again — this time from motor oil.

Tittel recommends that the township turn over that property to the county for inclusion in the adjacent park.

"Maybe they could make it a public campsite", he suggested.

Sounds good to me. I'll call up Hazy Davy and Killer Joe and see what they think.
