---
title: "That's why he's the Boss"
author: "Bernard Zuel"
source: "The Age"
date: "2013-04-01"
category: "Concert Review"
---

A decade ago, deflated Bruce Springsteen fans thought their last concert memories of a once-great live band would be forever tarnished by poor sound, surroundings and power outages - how wrong they were.

To understand why the 2013 Australian tour by Bruce Springsteen has been not just fantastic musically, critically and financially but also crucially and emotionally, you need to go back to 2003, the last time he brought the E Street Band to Australia.

On that tour, thanks to a combination of management overestimating (of Springsteen's support in Australia after an absence of hits or tours in 20 years) and the promoter underestimating (of how much resistance there was to outdoor shows), Springsteen played in stadiums in Sydney and Melbourne that were at best two-thirds full and had his Brisbane show transferred indoors due to poor sales.

More devastatingly for many fans, this one included, was how that Sydney show was a disaster, and I'm not even talking about the three power dropouts at the beginning of the set. If the distance to the stage (and the wildly enthusiastic behaviour of the front section, which suggested some people were having a great time) wasn't bad enough, back in the "boondocks" the truncated sound was so awful that some left early demanding refunds, while many other fans, this one included, sat numb and increasingly depressed at the thought that what looked to be the last opportunity to see one of the greatest live bands of all time was ending like this.

A decade later and more than 130,000 people saw 10 sold-out shows in multiple- night stands in Brisbane, Sydney and Melbourne, and two performances beneath the iconic rock face of Hanging Rock in country Victoria. Every review was ecstatic and online postings were almost hysterically euphoric with fans comparing setlists, set times and who got to hold Springsteen up as he crowd- surfed back to the stage.

What went right this time apart from the fact that distance had dulled some of the bruises of 2003? Well, for a start almost all the shows were indoors, where relative comfort could be guaranteed, sonic quality could be controlled and energy could be channelled, while the two outdoor shows were almost by definition special events. Also, rather than only seated areas there was a significant standing area at each show, which was filled with the wild, the innocent and the E Street fanatics; who queued early each day, carried signs (and children) and sang louder each night than anyone else. In that lot was the teenage girl in Brisbane whose sign asked Springsteen to dance with her mother in Dancing In The Dark (which he did, fulfilling her 30-year dream and leaving her speechless post-show) and the 20-something at Hanging Rock whose sign read "please rub my belly for luck" as she and her boyfriend were trying to get pregnant (he rubbed but we'll have to wait a few months to see that effect).

Then there was the fact that not only was the band playing superbly but every show saw the 63-year-old Springsteen run, jump, crowd-surf, play and sing for around three hours at a level that would shame most 30-year-olds. Added to this, every performance featured five, six and up to 10 songs not played at other shows on the tour, with the band regularly jumping out of the set list that already spanned his 40-year career to respond to audience requests; so even if you saw a couple of shows you'd be surprised and rewarded with a treat like If I Should Fall Behind, from his lesser-known album Lucky Town, at Hanging Rock, or an old live favourite from the '70s and '80s, Rosalita, which closed a couple of shows.

Remember this happened in an age where every second of most rock and pop shows are programmed months in advance and stay unchanged for the tour's duration.

Such flexibility is impressive enough for old hands like Gary Tallent and drummer Max Weinberg, who have been playing some of these songs for decades, but it's mind blowing for the likes of guest guitarist Tom Morello, whose playing and singing was one of the revelations of the tour and who rumour has it spent many of his days off learning new songs in case they came up the next night.

That level of commitment couldn't help but translate to audiences who recognised something else: while rock cliches were present, while several elements repeated each show (the kid brought up to sing Waitin' On A Sunny Day, the crowd surfing), on stage there was a genuine passion for the songs, the playing of them and the interaction with the audience that followed.

No band member left the stage free of sweat and exhaustion; no audience member left the room free of a connection made with this man. That it happens once is rare enough; that it happened every show for 10 shows is something near miraculous.
