---
title: "Why I love 'Born To Run' by Bruce Springsteen"
author: "Billy Hepfinger"
source: "Unknown"
date: "Unknown"
category: "Opinion"
---

Has there ever been a rock album quite like Born to Run? As a young person it's easy to grow up listening to "Born in the U.S.A." and "Glory Days" and thinking that Bruce Springsteen is essentially a glorified heartland rocker, in the vein of Bob Seger or John Mellencamp. And early in his career, Springsteen had already been hailed as the next Dylan after his first two albums, 1973's Greetings from Asbury Park, N.J. and The Wild, the Innocent & the E Street Shuffle, thanks in part to a proclivity toward lyric-heavy songs like "Blinded by the Light" and "Growin' Up." But with the release of Born to Run in 1975, Springsteen established himself as a bona fide rock 'n' roll revivalist: a devout acolyte of Elvis, Roy Orbison, and, maybe more than anyone, producer Phil Spector, whose lush arrangements were responsible for the iconic "girl group" sound of the '60s (and the oft-maligned orchestra backgrounds on the Beatles' Let It Be album). Born to Run is an album of dualities – entrapment and rebellion, joy and sorrow, hope and despair. But more than anything, it's an album that aimed to synthesize Springsteen's ratty, working-class, quintessentially urban personality with the saccharine sheen of 1950s and '60s pop. The result is something entirely unique: a rock 'n' roll opus that moves effortlessly from the backstreets to the front porch to the boardwalk, encapsulating exactly what it means to be young and restless and out of control.

Springsteen's characters hit triumphant highs and crushing lows throughout the album, from the fearless strut of "Tenth Avenue Freeze-Out" to the bitter despair of "Backstreets", but the one constant among the album's eight songs is that underlying feeling of restlessness. On Born to Run, the urge to get up and go, to do something, motivates every track. Sometimes it's the need to skip town and chase some nameless dream: on "Thunder Road", Bruce sings, "It's a town full of losers / And I'm pullin' out of here to win"; and the title track, of course, sums it up best: "Baby, this town rips the bones from your back / It's a death trap, it's a suicide rap / We gotta get out while we're young." On other tracks, though, Springsteen's restlessness takes other forms, like the search for meaning in the sprawling, mythical cityscapes of "Jungleland" or the unadulterated lust of "She's the One." Sometimes there's hope – on "Born to Run", the singer is sure that he and his girl will "get to that place where we really wanna go, and we'll walk in the sun" – and sometimes you know there's no chance, as in the doomed rendezvous that takes place in "Meeting Across the River."

"When the Scooter and the Big Man bust this city in half..."

But regardless of the outcome, one of Springsteen's greatest achievements on Born to Run is his complete commitment to the stakes of whatever it is he's singing about. His topics are mundane and often childish, but you never get the impression he isn't dead-serious. "Jungleland" is a song about a bunch of slacker kids bumming around late-night New York City, trolling the jukeboxes and looking for some cheap thrills. But Bruce sees an "opera out on the turnpike...a ballet being fought out in the alley." In his mind, these hoodrats are fighting a neverending battle for their souls – they "explode into rock 'n' roll bands" and "try to make an honest stand." Springsteen infuses the grit and ugliness of his world with bravado, electricity, and wonder, turning a juvenile romp along the Jersey Shore into an epic quest for love and freedom. It's hard to deny his vision when every track is so guileless, when the posturing and the melodrama only serve the album's youthful sincerity.

And when it comes to the music, Springsteen and the E Street Band are at their best and most expansive. There would later come a number of times in Bruce's career when he would feel the need to pare things down and create an intimacy with the listener – Nebraska, The Ghost of Tom Joad, Devils and Dust – but in 1975, Bruce wanted to blow the place up. Songs like "Night" and "She's the One" are bursting at the seams with energy and sound, all saxophone and shimmering glockenspiel, and even on "Meeting Across the River", the ghostly trumpet stuttering in the distance sounds like it can barely be restrained. And "Born to Run", of course, is unquestionably the biggest, most symphonic song Springsteen's ever written. In the liner notes of his Greatest Hits album, Springsteen calls the song "My shot at the title. A 24 yr. old kid aimin' at 'The greatest rock 'n' roll record ever.'" Whether or not he succeeded is a matter of personal opinion (my own is that he did), but you can't argue that he didn't try. The song has often been compared to "Good Vibrations", and for good reason; it's said that Bruce recorded over eight different tracks of guitar alone for the song, including my favorite, the space-alien wah-wah guitar that only barely surfaces in the bridge. Every listen seems to bring a new instrument to the forefront, whether it's the glockenspiel, the baritone saxophone, the strings, or Ernest Carter's relentless drums.

"The amusement park rises bold and stark..."

It's just as easy, though, to drown in the combined forces of all the sounds you're hearing, and the effect is literally synesthetic – when Springsteen sings "the amusement park rises bold and stark / and kids are huddled on the beach in the mist", I can actually see a Ferris wheel lit up over a dark, chilly waterfront, as if each instrument is providing a different visual cue. The song never ceases to pick up speed, somehow, even though the intensity is turned up all the way from the outset, and the constant forward progress makes you feel like you're one of Springsteen's "hemi-powered drones" screaming down the highway. You feel in your bones, inexplicably, that the song cannot be about anything but movement (could "Born to Run" ever make you feel like sitting still?), and yet the most poignant aspect of the song is its futility. The singer is so sure of his impending escape, so invested in his dream, that we get caught up along with him – but at the end of the song, there's no indication that he's actually succeeded, or that he ever will.

Born to Run consistently surprises the listener this way: just when you think he's going to get out, you realize he probably never will; and even when all hope seems lost, there's always a chance for redemption. In "Jungleland", the city seems like a dreamworld until the end, when "the Rat's own dream guns him down" and "they wind up wounded, not even dead." And the utter defeat of "Backstreets", possibly the most beautiful, sorrowful song Springsteen has ever recorded, is immediately followed by the eternal optimism of "Born to Run." The album is a maelstrom of complex emotion, street-corner machismo with a decidedly sensitive touch – an impossible combination for the breezy pop stars of the '50s and '60s or the caustic punks of the '70s and '80s. Only Bruce Springsteen, simultaneously an amalgamation of the two and something utterly unlike either of them, could have made it happen.
