---
title: "Born To Run Review"
author: "Jerry Gilbert"
source: "Sounds"
date: "1975-09-13"
category: "Album Review"
---

THE VISIONARIES and rock and roll prophets who predicted that this album would be the making of Bruce Springsteen may have noted that while their hero has remained both sedulous and patient, his first two much-acclaimed albums which were largely ignored by the record-buying public have re-entered the Cashbox charts.

After all that high-blown praise, the past two years must have been torturously slow as the Asbury Park kid and his number one fan Jon Landau strove to satisfy expectations in a fresh recording location and with a fresh band. It has an unhealthy time span – some of the romance has gone too. There was a special charge about that voluminous yet incongruous bunch of New Jersey bar musicians that were the old backing band; when Springsteen wanted them to sound like Gary US Bond there were voices and instruments everywhere. Then, at the given word, a tuba and an accordion would step forward and go it alone. But that band took an economic dive and Mad Dog Lopez and Doom Carter are no longer around. Nor is Danny Federici or keyboard showman David Sancious who now has his own solo album. Their swansong, (with the exception of Lopez), is the title track of the new album, recorded post-E Street Shuffle and with the surviving members of the band, Garry Tallent and Bruce's number one side man Clarence Clemons. It's Clemons, in fact, who provides some of the real magic, blowing some moving sax harmonies on 'Jungleland' and 'Night'.

The theme for the most part is tight R&B, not the stretched out episodic street-life ballads that characterised the E Street Shuffle album. The metaphor is still vibrant in Springsteen's tails of seedy back-alley associations but the vocal is often muted and brought back into the ensemble leaving no room for the extended monotone or near monologue through which Springsteen unwound his earlier tales.

Those who were quick to make comparisons with Van Morrison or the early R&B men will find fodder for their arguments in 'Tenth Avenue Freeze-Out' or 'She's The One'. 'Jungleland' is probably most typical of the Springsteen sound of eighteen months ago, the story subject being introduced over a simple piano introduction and gradually building through several themes until suddenly 'Jungleland' has become a transmutation of Dylan's 'Desolation Row' nine years on. 'Thunder Road', the opening cut on the album, is launched in much the same way, and it should be added that CBS, who somehow goofed the last album by failing to provide a lyric sheet, have gone to great pains to run every song across a splendid black and white gatefold sleeve. It ensures that none of the lyrical magic is missed; it also allays fears that Bruce's writing would suffer away from the New Jersey boardwalk life and on the road seven nights a week.

Comparisons with Dylan seem to move further into the distance. Bruce's self- portraits show him to be a James Dean figure but then Dylan was a product of the same ethos – yet there are times when you could be listening to Wilson Pickett! Three tracks, 'Night', 'Jungleland' and the beautiful reflective 'Meeting Across The River' are a model of structure composition. But elsewhere the band fails to convey the variation of mood that Springsteen's songs demand. They don't all require the urgency that accompanies city paranoia and Mike Appel and Jon Landau aren't able to provide the necessary dispassionate ears to detect studio foibles.

Springsteen's new musicians have got the chops alright while his own brilliance is now contained rather than allowed to run free. But the point is that it's still there and it's the distinction from the two previous efforts that makes this album so interesting. I have grown to love it but newcomers to Bruce's music would be better advised to check out what the critics have been raving about in the past. Old fans will need to persevere. Released in this country on October 10.

© Jerry Gilbert, 1975
