---
title: "Bruce Springsteen flirts with the four-hour mark in Philadelphia"
author: "Tris McCall"
source: "The Star-Ledger"
date: "2012-09-03"
category: "Concert Review"
---

The unsinkable Bruce Springsteen takes Citizens Bank Park.

Two hours into his Sunday night concert -- the first of two scheduled for Citizens Bank Stadium in Philadelphia -- Bruce Springsteen was sprinting from one side of the stage to the other. More than three hours in, he was spinning around on his back, guitar in hand, singing "Rosalita." Almost three and a half hours after the stadium lights went down, he pulled a woman out of the audience, slow danced with her, and then picked her up like a groom carrying a bride across the threshhold, and brought her back to her friends. He took no breaks, paused only briefly before his encore set, and led his band through the obligatory false endings, cavalry-charge outros, and crescendos that would not be curtailed. This was rock and roll maximalism at its purest, done by a man who gives the impression that you'd have to rip the guitar out of his hands to stop him from strumming. How much stamina does Bruce Springsteen (and the members of his E Street Band) have? Let's put it this way: There were two enthusiastic superfans in front of me at the show. They began playing enthusiastic air guitar during the first song, and kept it up for hours. By the encore, they were spent. Springsteen kept going. Their instruments were imaginary. His was real. "He kicked my butt again!", said one of the guys. He kicked everybody's butt again, fella. And here's the amazing thing: He's going to do it all again tomorrow night. Mind you, none of this happened in the controlled climate of an arena. This concert was out on the outfield grass of a major league ballpark on the kind of night that prompts some players to ask out of the lineup. It was hot, wet, and sticky in Philadelphia. A few songs into the show, and the musicians' clothes were already soaked in sweat. Springsteen's voice sounded pleasantly ragged, and I wondered if all the touring had gotten to him, and if it would give out during the second half. Then something odd happened. As the members of the audience worked themselves up into the customary froth, the E Street Band seemed to get dryer. Springsteen's singing grew stronger. By the end of the concert, he was testifying like a street preacher visited by the Holy Spirit. Rain was in the forecast, and he prayed that it wouldn't come. Did the skies open? Of course not. The Boss gets what he wants.

Altogether, the E Street Band played 25 songs in the main set, and 8 in the encore. As this was a Bruce Springsteen concert, they took it easy for exactly none of them. A few ballads were tucked in to give drummer Max Weinberg a blow, but by the end of the set, he looked about ready to pass out. He never dropped a stitch, though: Weinberg was terrific as always. He should be getting combat pay. The group continued the tradition of sign requests (fans in the front row hold up placards with songs they'd like to hear), airing "Good Rockin' Tonight", "Cadillac Ranch", "I'm on Fire", and a showstopping rendition of "Jersey Girl." They opened the show with a cover of "Summertime Blues" and closed with an inexhaustible version of "Twist and Shout." Heck, they might still be playing it. Somebody ought to go by the stadium and check. They can't stay there forever; eventually, the Phillies are going to need it back.

Here's the very long setlist-

Summertime Blues Out in the Street Sherry Darling Hungry Heart We Take Care of Our Own Wrecking Ball Death to My Hometown Lost in the Flood My City of Ruins Spirit in the Night Green Onions Good Rockin' Tonight Cadillac Ranch I'm on Fire Candy's Room She's the One (with a bit of Mona spliced in) Jack of All Trades Human Touch Working on the Highway Shackled and Drawn Waiting on a Sunny Day Jersey Girl The Rising Badlands Land of Hope and Dreams ENCORE We Are Alive Thunder Road Born to Run Rosalita Dancing in the Dark Tenth Avenue Freeze-Out Can't Sit Down Twist and Shout
