---

title: "Are you ready to be transformed?"- Springsteen in Portland"
author: "David Greenwald"
source: "The Oregon"
date: "2016-03-22"
category: "Concert Review"
---

"Bruuuce!" a man shouted in the Moda Center parking lot on Tuesday night, a mating call or a battle-cry. "Bruuuce!" another man called back, his family exiting a minivan. The yellow sunset kissed the West Hills.

Some musicians are a kind of religion. Their fans follow them from show to show, city to city, decade to decade. Springsteen is one, and on Tuesday, he and the E Street Band promised pleasure and transcendence: "Are you ready to be entertained?" he cried to the packed arena. He shouted it again, and then: "Are you ready to be transformed?"

The incredible thing—one of the many incredible things that happened at this Springsteen concert, and presumably does at all of them—was that he was shouting to a fully lit arena. The Boss required no shadowy entrance, no pyrotechnic explosions, no divide between himself and his audience when he stepped on stage for "The River" outtake and set opener "Meet Me in the City."

The lights went down eventually, but it was a fearless, honest greeting, the start of a show without a hint of spectacle beyond the musicians on stage.

The band's current tour is a celebration of 1980's "The River", an album Springsteen called his "coming of age" record. It's shocking in classic-rock retrospect, but it was his first No. 1 album, and "Hungry Heart" his first single to reach the top 10. At 20 tracks, it was also his longest effort.

Not every song on "The River" is a classic, but over the course of the show's first two hours, Springsteen made their intentions clear. Among the highlights: the propulsive "Two Hearts", a song a dozen or so scruffy indie bands are still trying to improve on right now; "Out on the Street", which winked toward Elvis Costello's "Armed Forces" and its bright keyboards; and "I Wanna Marry You", which Springsteen approached with two handfuls of maracas and Sam Cooke soulfulness.

"It's a song about the kind of love you have before... ooh... the real love"he said, in a moment of banter-wisdom so convincing you could practically see him cradling a couple of newly etched stone tablets. "No responsibilities. The kind that doesn't exist! That kind. But it points the way, sometimes it points the way to the other kind." Every time Springsteen paused to talk, I wanted him to start an advice podcast. What doesn't he know? What hasn't he felt?

He knows about love: wife Patti Scialfa remains an E Street stalwart, and he rubbed her shoulder in a tender moment during "Sherry Darling." The band's camaraderie all these decades later was better than any blast of confetti: to see players so devoted to their music and their friendships was genuinely inspiring. As was their 66-year-old frontman's successful crowd-surfing trip through half the floor section.

"Bruuuce" was the name the crowd kept chanting in uncoordinated slow motion, like the roar of a far-off dinosaur, but there were plenty of heroes on stage: One thing you never have to worry about at an E Street Band show is if drummer Max Weinberg is going to smash through the next pre-chorus fill like a monster truck. And in the shoes of his late uncle, Clarence Clemons, saxophonist Jake Clemons stepped into his parts with joy.

There wasn't an encore—we were lucky to catch our breath between songs—but after "The River", the band gave us another hour-plus, ripping through "The Promised Land", "Because the Night", "Brilliant Disguise" and others. After "Lonesome Day", Springsteen said a sentence that very much sounded like "That's for our friends in Sleater-Kinney", which was the best Sleater-Kinney moment at the Moda Center since the band teased their reunion with a surprise Pearl Jam appearance.

"Do you have anything left, Portland?!" Springsteen wailed after a mind- melting run of "Born to Run", a fast version of "Dancing in the Dark" and the deeply underrated "Rosalita (Come Out Tonight)." I wasn't sure I did: then the band played "Tenth Avenue Freeze Out." Were we entertained? We were beyond that.

There are a few people whose reviews of this show I would like to read: The giddy young boy in the checkered shirt and blue earplugs dancing next to his (presumable) grandmother and trying not to fall asleep as the set crept past the two-hour mark; the khakis dad in the baseball cap with his phone in his shirt pocket, clapping on the first and third beats of "Because the Night."

Springsteen has millions of true believers, but that doesn't matter: on Tuesday, he took us to the river one by one.

-- David Greenwald
