---
title: "Tunnel Tour Takes Him On Career Detour"
author: "Edna Gundersen"
source: "USA Today"
date: "1988-03-08"
category: "Interview"
---

PHILADELPHIA – It's 1:30 a.m and Bruce Springsteen sits on a couch in his dressing room, an untouched slice of cake on the coffee table. He unwinds in this makeshift sanctum while the hall outside buzzes with friends, band members, program-clutching fans.

Though a forbidding vision in black, from linen shirt to silver-tipped boots, Springsteen is vibrant. Surprisingly so for someone who's labored four hours blowing the roof off the Spectrum, sixth stop on a new trail he's blazing: the Tunnel of Love Express tour.

"We're really happy because we're doing quite a bit of stuff that people completely haven't heard at all or have only heard very little", he says during a rare interview that reveals what motivated this course. The show draws heavily from the sober Tunnel of Love LP and favors obscure slices like I'm a Coward, a revamped Geno Washington tune.

He says, "If you get a good band and play that stuff real well and present it in a clear and concise fashion – and the audience is receptive, which the audiences have been – then you can do whatever you want to do.

Clearly, Springsteen is doing exactly what he wants to. Enough of the 38-year- old's still brash and indefatigable spirit remains (in fire and brimstone like Rosalita) so that the audience is not disoriented. But he has consciously crafted a show that confounds expectations and veers wildly from the blistering battle hymns and stadium hysteria of his triumphant Born in the U.S.A tour.

"I knew if I was going to go out, I was going to do something thematically different", he says. "I felt like the time to break with the past a little bit."

Springsteen first envisioned a total departure: an acoustic show. He then considered a half-acoustic, half-Tunnel mix.

"I thought about doing every conceivable combination", he says. "And I realized that basically the integration of everything I do is always the most exciting thing – it's the most physical and the most fun for me. I thought if I did an acoustic tour it would end up being too cerebral. It didn't make any sense to limit myself."

The result: a pastiche of songs that underscores the dashed notions of utopian romance faced in Tunnel of Love, his ninth and most cohesive LP.

"The idea was to find stuff that fit in the Tunnel of Love idea", he says. "I figured I would put down the things that have been the cornerstones of the show for 10 years – put those away, give them a rest till it feels right to play them again. You put down all the things that become clichés."

Thus discarded staples like Badlands and Thunder Road are supplanted by fresh gambles: a reggae-fueled Part Man, Part Monkey, blustery decade-old Roulette (the B-side of One Step Up) and Tunnel's harrowing parables.

"If you keep doing what you've been doing, you're just an oldies act"Springsteen says with a laugh. "We didn't want to do that."

Signposts throughout the concert mark a detour from tradition: He introduces Spare Parts as a song "about the struggle to let the past go...The past is something that binds us together and at the same time it holds us back."

What may surprise longtime fans most is the Express tour's unvarying script, a reversal of the dizzying improvisations of the past. A few surprises have cropped up – 10th Avenue Freezeout, Raise Your Hand, Love Me Tender – but Springsteen is clinging to an agenda.

"I planned it very specifically, because we were doing what for us would be a relatively short tour", he says. The Express "is a show. It is specific. The songs all integrate and resonate off each other. We're only playing a couple of nights in each city. Changing the show a lot came from playing so many multiple nights in different cities. This show is not as loose. It has much more focus."

The uncompromising restraint of Tunnel of Love, which Springsteen considers one of his best, in no way squelches the singer's ferocity. Nor does its intimate tone suffer in full-band treatments.

"It was basically stripped-down soul music, so I just fleshed it out, put the horns in there and got into the mood of it. And it translates real easily in a very relaxed fashion to a big stage. It's very funny, because a lot of the audience is still unfamiliar with a lot of the Tunnel of Love material, which means they probably haven't bought the record."

He grins and shrugs. "That's good. I get a chance to present it. I get a chance to reintroduce myself as a songwriter and as just a guy in a band."

The Tunnel material "invites them in and you get your ideas across. The stuff tends to be very musical and people can hear the ideas, the words."

"As I got older...it felt like that guy and that girl were out there searching for something better, looking outward into the world, trying to find a place where they can stand and grow up a little bit. So, I guess as I've gotten older that's what I've tried to do, find some sort of home for myself"

He spent six months composing Born to Run. Today, the words come easier.

"My writing tends to get easier as I get older, because I tend to be more open to it and less afraid of it, less afraid of what's going to come out", he says.

"I have less of a desire to control my output, to control what's coming out.

Writing a good song is never easy, but it's not as pained and I don't put myself through a lot of extraneous bull like I used to 10 years ago. Some of the Tunnel of Love songs I wrote real quickly. The only trick to writing a new song is you have to have a new idea. And to have a new idea you gotta be a little bit of a new person, so that's where the challenge is."

Springsteen felt no pressure to match the profits of Born in the U.S.A, 18 million copies sold worldwide. Tunnel has sold 5 million. "I'm living to do something new, not necessarily to top myself", he says. "If you get into that, you're just into a game, and it's not very interesting. Plus, it's a losing game. I'm just trying to grow and learn some things and find some new things in my job and in my music and present to my audience."

It's no accident Springsteen's Tunnel departure arrives on the heels of Live/1975-85, a rollicking retrospective that seemed to close the door on youthful abandon. Springsteen recalls listening to all five records with his band: "We played it in my room", he says. "We all sat there and listened to it. And I said, 'Well, 10 years, there it is. When you have those little babies and they want to know what you did these past 10 years, you play them this record.' I think it's something to be proud of."
