---
title: "Radio Interview - November 8th, 1978"
author: "CHOM-FM"
source: "CHOM-FM"
date: "1978-11-08"
category: "Interview"
---

**BS:** Hi

**DJ:** How ya doin' man?

**BS:** Okay!

**DJ:** We have the man himself on the line, Mr. Bruce Springsteen and I think the first thing that I should say Bruce, on behalf of Montreal, is uh, thanks for a dynamite show. It was like unreal. People have been coming here to the station, they've been ringing the door bell, they've been phoning me and telling me it's the best show they've heard in their life.

**BS:** Wow, that's great (chuckles)

**DJ:** How are things going for you? Are you pretty tired right now? You probably just got off stage a little while ago?

**BS:** No, I feel good now. It was like, uh, it was really surprising 'cause we hadn't been here in about uh, I guess 2 or 3 years, you know, it's been quite a while, and I remember it was nothing like this, you know (chuckles) and the crowd was just uh, they were just, you know, like uh, fantastic...

**DJ:** Montreal loves you

**BS:** ...Epic uh, reception you know, and uh, we had a great time, you know. It was really uh, it was really surprising. It was really nice, you know.

**DJ:** I know the last time you were here was uh, I think about 3 years ago. You played at Place des Artes to a very, very small crowd and you've come up in the world since then, a heck of a lot.

**BS:** I guess the world, all we've known, it was like, uh, there was a lot of people there tonight, (?) be a lot, you know, and uh, it was really, I didn't know exactly what to expect, you know, 'cause we hadn't been up here too much, uh, we were up here for about 3 dates on that, I guess, '76 tour, you know, or '75 tour, and then we really haven't gotten up here, you know, too much again and uh, it was really uh, it was really a treat. It was really nice.

**DJ:** Listen Bruce, I've got a question for you. What happened to Miami Steve? I don't think I found him on stage tonight.

**BS:** Yeah, he was up there!

**DJ:** He was up there?

**BS:** (laughs) Yeah! (laughs)

**DJ:** Because he...

**BS:** He was the guy, uh,...

**DJ:** With the hat on?...

**BS:** Right, over to the left (laughs)...

**DJ:** Okay...

**BS:** You know, he was, he was there

**DJ:** Clarence was in fine, fine form tonight

**BS:** Yeah (still laughing)...

**DJ:** As usual...

**BS:** Yeah, yeah, everybody was uh, you know, it was sorta, uh, excited, you know, comin' in, you know, 'cause it's uh, it was a real nice town, it was a real nice city, like the last time we were here, we spent a few days, and uh, I really, I really liked it so, it was nice that it just, everything worked out so good, you know, and the audience was ... wild, it was really, really wild, wild response, it was uh, really exciting, you know

**DJ:** I know, I caught the first part of the show. I caught about an hour and then I had to come here to go on the air but what I saw was dynamite. Um, I was gonna ask you something about your tour. When, you were, you were touring all summer. It was a real hectic tour from what I can understand and uh, then you took a bit of a break. What'd you do?

**BS:** Well, let me see, what'd I do? I uh, went out west, a little bit, out towards Arizona and to California. I wrote a couple songs and then came back and rehearsed and went out. I only had about 3 weeks really, you know, to uh, fool around. It was funny because I never, traveled before without playing, you know, it was like, the first time I was ever, like, uh, away, you know, from New Jersey and stuff, without somebody knocking on the door and sayin', 'Alright, 5 minutes', you know, guy on the bus (chuckles)...

**DJ:** Right...

**BS:** So, I had a good time. It was okay. Didn't do too much, foolin' around

**DJ:** What really impressed me in the first part of the concert, the part that I saw, was some of your new material, like a song called Independence Day. Blew me away.

**BS:** Ah, thank, thank you. Yeah, I wrote that about uh, quite, a long time ago. It was funny, I wrote it before I wrote, like uh, a lot of the stuff that was on Darkness but, there just wasn't room, you know, there wasn't room for it, and we got a version that's recorded and everything of that song already.

We'll probably do it again for the next album but uh, we've had that sittin"

around so, we started, we're doing about 2 or 3 new songs every night a set now. I want to try and (?), you know, get a little audience reaction before we go in and make the next album, you know, I haven't had a chance to ever do that. I usually end up writing in the studio and uh, and hustlin' down to the last wire, you know, the last minute. So, this time, I'm trying to write, while I'm on the road and get to play it, you know, and see how the people like the songs and stuff ...So, I'm glad to hear you liked it

**DJ:** Uh, it was dynamite, and uh, we wanna thank you. On behalf of everybody, hope you're gonna come back to town real soon. Are you staying for a while or are you splitting right away?

**BS:** I'm going to stay tomorrow, as much as we can, we got a day off tomorrow and then we're flying out sometime tomorrow night, I think, so I'm gonna try uh, (? got brown), get in the daytime, so I can get up, you know...

**DJ:** Sure...

**BS:** (talking real low and can't make it out - think he's falling asleep)

**DJ:** If you get a chance...

**BS:** (picks up the volume) look around, shop around

**DJ:** If you get a chance while you're shopping around...

**BS:** (perks up, probably senses the favor about to be asked!) Nice talking to you there! (chuckles)

**DJ:** Come on by CHOM, we'd love to see ya...

**BS:** I'd like to go and to just thank uh, everybody that came down to the show, you know, for making it such uh, uh, good show, and uh, I really appreciate it, you know, 'cause we hadn't been up that much (a live Raise Your Hand starts playing), and it was really, uh, we just, it was just uh, really fantastic response. I'd just like to, just like to say thanks to everybody and see ya next time

**DJ:** Thanks a lot Bruce. Bye-bye

**BS:** Bye
