---
title: "The Hundred Greatest Bruce Springsteen Songs"
author: "Brian Hiatt"
source: "Rolling Stone"
date: "2018-12-11"
category: "Opinion"
---

1- BORN TO RUN - 1975

When a 24-year-old Bruce Springsteen began writing "Born to Run", he had a title, a surf-guitar riff indebted to Duane Eddy's "Because They're Young" and the Tornados' "Telstar", and some desperate, extravagant hopes. "I had these enormous ambitions for it", said Springsteen, who was, at the time, a hitless cult artist in dire danger of losing his record deal. "I wanted to make the greatest rock record that I'd ever heard. I wanted it to sound enormous, to grab you by your throat and insist that you take that ride, insist that you pay attention – not just to the music, but to life, to being alive."

Springsteen started work on the song one day in early 1974, sitting in his bed in a rented cottage a couple of blocks from the beach in Long Branch, New Jersey, and the record then took shape in a small Hudson Valley studio, via six months worth of overdubs, some never used: endless acoustic and electric guitars, electric and acoustic piano, organ, glockenspiel, strings, violin, synth, engine noises and a choir.

"We went through a lot of different ways of playing it", said former E Street Band drummer Ernest "Boom" Carter, who left the band shortly after finishing the song. "I became a pretty good dart player, pool player, hanging out in that studio." Springsteen hit his target, ending up with a brash, careening masterpiece that became his signature anthem. At age 64, he's still able to infuse passion and meaning when he plays it with the E Street Band under blazing house lights.

"It was a record of enormous longing", he says, "and those emotions and desires never leave you. You're dead when that leaves you. The song transcends your age and continues to speak to that part of you that is both exhilarated and frightened about what tomorrow brings. It will always do that – that's how it was built."

2- BADLANDS -1978

"I came up with titles, and I went in search of songs that would deserve the title", Springsteen said, describing the writing of Darkness. "'Badlands' – that's a great title, but it would be easy to blow it! But I kept writing, and I kept writing, and I kept writing and writing until I had a song that I felt deserved that title." He nicked a riff from the Animals' "Don't Let Me Be Misunderstood" and tapped the ferocity of the punk singles he'd been listening to at the time and ended up with a song that perfectly fits Pete Townshend's definition of a rock anthem: "praying onstage." "I believe in the faith that can save me/I believe and I hope and I pray/That someday it will raise me/Above these Badlands", Springsteen sings. "That's him singing the high part, while his other voice, this full-throated thing, continues below", says Jackson Browne. "It's cool and thrilling. There is an economy of language that comes in here. He's building a persona, a lexicon of references."

3- THUNDER ROAD – 1975

Springsteen was sure that Born to Run would open with its title track – until he wrote "Thunder Road." "'Thunder Road' was just so obviously an opening, due to its intro", he says. "It just set the scene. There is something about the melody of 'Thunder Road' that just suggests a new day, it suggests morning, it suggests something opening up." He wrote "Thunder Road" on the piano in his living room; later, keyboardist Roy Bittan elegantly extrapolated Springsteen's parts. Said Springsteen, "Roy's attack and formulations of what I showed him really created a very, very unique sound, and, in the end, if people hear that today, they go, 'That sounds like the E Street Band.'" Like many of Springsteen's early songs, the lyrics hint at a perspective beyond his years: "So you're scared and you're thinking maybe we ain't that young anymore." "The songs were written immediately after the Vietnam War, and you forget­ everybody felt like that then", Springsteen says. "There's quite a sense of dread and uncertainty about the future and who you were, where you were going, where the whole country was going, so that found its way into the record."

4- RACING IN THE STREET -1978

Side one of Darkness on the Edge of Town closes with the most quietly devastating song in Springsteen's catalog. Although it was also recorded as a fiery full-band rocker, the version on the album is a stripped piano ballad, sung from the perspective of a small-town loser with a souped-up car and a tired-eyed girl. Introducing the song live in 1978, Springsteen said it was inspired by "this little fire road" outside Asbury Park. The lyrics riff on Martha and the Vandellas' Motown classic "Dancing in the Street" and even recommend engine heads for a '69 Chevy. But as the song's solemn instrumental coda rolls on, you know there's no happy ending on the horizon ("Tonight my baby and me, we're gonna ride to the sea/And wash these sins off our hands"Springsteen sings). "The meaning is as much in the parts where he doesn't sing as where he does", says Tom Morello. "You really feel this endless helplessness as they drive on into an uncertain future."

5- THE RIVER – 1980

Many of the tragic characters in Springsteen's songs are fictional. But the teenage couple in "The River" were drawn from his own real-life experience.

Springsteen's sister Ginny became pregnant at age 18 and quickly married her child's father, Mickey Shave, who took a construction job to support his family. "They had to struggle very hard back in the late Seventies, like so many people are doing today", Springsteen said when he performed The River live in its entirety in 2009\. He turned their story into his most moving working-class lament, a slow, sparse ballad with a mournful harmonica part that starts to sound like a funeral dirge as the song ends. Springsteen debuted "The River" at the No Nukes concert in September 1979, shortly after recording it with the E Street Band at New York's Power Station studio. His sister was in the crowd, but she didn't know that Springsteen had written a song about her. "Every bit of it was true", Ginny told Springsteen biographer Peter Ames Carlin. "And here I am, completely exposed. I didn't like it at first – but now it's my favorite song." Today, Ginny and Mickey are still happily married.

6- BACKSTREETS – 1975

In his Rolling Stone review of Born to Run, Greil Marcus said Roy Bittan's cascading piano intro to "Backstreets" was so powerful "it might be the prelude to a rock & roll version of The Iliad." The song has invited many interpretations: It may be about Springsteen's early-Seventies ­girlfriend Diane Lozito, or a close male friendship that's faded (some hear homoerotic undertones in the song). He contrasts tragic images – "Remember all the movies, Terry, we'd go see/Trying to learn how to walk like heroes we thought we had to be" – and triumphal music that echoes mid-Sixties­ Bob Dylan (especially in its Blonde on Blonde-style organ). It's taken on deep personal meaning; he played it frequently in 2007, after longtime assistant Terry Magovern died, and it opened the first show the E Street Band played after organist Danny Federici died in 2008 (poignantly, minus the organ part). "Put on 'Backstreets' and everyone holds up their whiskey and sings along", says Bethany Cosentino of Best Coast. "It really brings people together."

7-ATLANTIC CITY -1982

Nebraska was my entry, how I got into Bruce. That was the easiest one to spend time with, because it was so bare and so direct. And the storytelling is so interesting. The song "Nebraska" – you hear the first couple of notes, and you are right in this world.

Our [2004] album, Funeral, was not exactly the record you want to put on at any minute of the day. It takes a certain amount of engagement to make a connection with it. In a way, it's like Born to Run, which demands something of you. Whereas Nebraska – it can be on in the background, and it sucks you in. It's not asking for your complete attention. There is not this huge band hammering in your face. It can sneak up on you.

"Atlantic City" has a hook. The pop aspect to it backs up the storytelling.

You find yourself humming that song all the time. And that is the connection point. And there are these little details in that song that you don't hear in a pop song: "Put on your stockings, baby, 'cause the night is getting cold."

But it's got this incredible hook to it.

There are certain limitations to rock & roll, the sounds you can make. But there are an infinite number of stories. This record is about storytelling and using music to heighten the story.

By Win Butler of Arcade Fire

8- DARKNESS ON THE EDGE OF TOWN - 1978

If Born to Run was dominated by romantic visions of escape, its follow-up was about finding a place to make a stand. The street-racing narrator of Darkness on the Edge of Town's album-closing title track has lost his wife, his money and his hope for a better life, but he remains defiant: "Tonight I'll be on that hill 'cause I can't stop", Springsteen snarls over a stately, archetypally E Street arrangement. Springsteen described the song's hero as having "reached a point where you just have to strip yourself of everything to get yourself together." Steve Van Zandt said it highlights the feel of the whole album. "It looks heroic, sometimes it feels heroic, but it's actually an obsession, a compulsion", he says. "The song just sums up that record very accurately, in terms of 'the stories now, we're gonna not necessarily have a happy ending.' You still have the cinematic thing going on, but it's smaller.

The cameras are zooming in. It's more of an independent film now."

9 –BORN IN THE USA - 1984

Both "Born in the U.S.A." and its eventual B side, the quieter veteran's lament "Shut Out the Light", had its origins in a third, never-finished song, "Vietnam." That composition split in two after Springsteen grabbed the phrase "Born in the U.S.A." from the title page of a Paul Schrader screenplay he'd been sent. Springsteen recorded a solo acoustic version of "Born in the U.S.A." in the same cassette-demo sessions that produced Nebraska, but the song seemed unspectacular in that format. "It was one of the lesser songs on the Nebraska tape", said producer Jon Landau. But Springsteen revived the song in E Street Band sessions, where it instantly came to spectacular life: "We just kinda did it off the cuff", Springsteen said. "I never taught it to the band. I went in and said, 'Roy, get this riff.' And he just pulled out that sound, played the riff on the synthesizer. We played it two times, and our second take is on the rec­ord. That's why the guys are really on the edge. . .

. To me, [Max Weinberg] was right up there with the best of them on that song.

There was no arrangement. I said, 'When I stop, keep the drums going.' That thing in the end with all the drums, that just kinda happened."

10 – THE PROMISED LAND – 1978

The distinctly non-Jersey imagery of this song – tornadoes, a "rattlesnake speedway in the Utah desert" – was inspired by a road trip Springsteen took as he worked on Darkness on the Edge of Town. The simple, straightforward music, meanwhile, is one of the best examples of Springsteen stripping down in the aftermath of the wall-of-sound grandeur of Born to Run: "I remember him telling me he really wanted to downsize the scale, that big sound", producer Jon Landau said years later, describing the transition out of the highly orchestrated Born to Run. Bittan's spare but expansive piano and Weinberg's driving beat fit lyrics that balance images of isolation and frustration with a hunger for independence within a larger community. "It really begins our folk-based rock", Springsteen said of "The Promised Land." "It goes back to blues and folk, and folk structures – I was not trying to be really melodic, because that immediately pulls you into the pop world. I was trying to create this mixture, this sort of rock-folk music that stretches back all the way, in some ways, to Woody Guthrie and country music and up through the Animals."

11 "Rosalita (Come Out Tonight)"

1973

Springsteen wrote his first real anthem for exactly the purpose it ended up serving for decades: to blow the roof off concert venues of all shapes and sizes. The cadence and melody of the song appeared in a Van Morrison-style soul-folk tune called "Henry Boy", which he performed solo acoustic in 1972.

By the time he recorded "Rosalita" in early 1973, it was a surging, exultant, breathless rocker – not to mention, a totally true story: "Tell him this is his last chance/To get his daughter in a fine romance/Because the record company, Rosie, just gave me a big advance." Springsteen later said, "The stuff I write is the stuff I live with.... They're all true. Even the names – Big Balls Billy, Weak-Kneed Willie, all of 'em." (Ex-girlfriend Diane Lozito is believed to have inspired the song, but Springsteen has never given any indication as to Rosie's true identity.) The song's romantic dilemma – Rosie's dad has locked her away – is presented with fierce urgency, except for one lyric, which Springsteen later called "one of the most useful lines I've ever written": "Someday we'll look back on this and it will all seem funny."

12 "The Ghost of Tom Joad"

1995

After three very personal albums in a row – Tunnel of Love, Human Touch and Lucky Town – writing "Streets of Philadelphia" helped remind Springsteen that some of his best songs reached beyond his own experience and, as he put it, "had some sort of social theme." "It was about re-finding that place in myself", said Springsteen, who had long admired John Ford's film adaptation of The Grapes of Wrath. "That's really how the song 'Tom Joad' came about. I was interested in reconnecting to those things and reconnecting to the part of myself that had written about them." In writing "Joad", he was also thinking about the Republicans' assault on the social safety net: He dedicated one live version to the "Gingrich mob." He originally intended it as a rock song, but released it in a hushed acoustic arrangement. Two years later, Rage Against the Machine radically retooled it into an unlikely modern-rock hit – and Springsteen would go on to do the definitive live version with Rage guitarist Tom Morello.

13 "Jungleland"

1975

Springsteen once described Born to Run's grand finale as a "spiritual battleground." He was referring to the song's narrative, but he could just as well have been talking about its creation. Recording began in mid-1974 alongside "Born to Run", but the sessions hit a wall, prompting Springsteen to change studios. A Spanish-­flavored intro was cut, numerous takes were made and discarded, and most famously, in a 16-hour fit of inspired obsessive- compulsiveness, Springsteen led Clarence Clemons through every note of his soaring sax part, over and over, until it was perfect. "All we could do was hold on – smoke a lot of pot and try to stay calm", said Clemons of the sessions. The result was a nine-minute epic, a tale of outlaw love gone wrong, beginning with Suki Lahav's searching violin and Roy Bittan's jazzy piano and building into a miniature rock opera, peaking with Clemons' magnificent extended solo, which was in fact edited together from pieces of takes by Springsteen. It was worth the effort, wowing even Clemons, who considered the solo collage a pinnacle of his musical partnership with Springsteen. "To me"the sax man said in his memoir, "that solo sounds like love."

14 "Nebraska"

1982

"Nebraska was about that American isolation: What happens to people when they're alienated from their friends and their community and their government and their job", Springsteen said of his stark 1982 acoustic album. On its arresting title track, he sings in a flat, almost emotionless voice as he steps into the mind of Fifties serial killer Charles Starkweather, who with his girlfriend killed 11 people in Wyoming and Nebraska. The song was inspired by seeing Terrence Malick's film Badlands on TV. Springsteen's bare-bones acoustic-guitar/harmonica version fit the vividly descriptive lyrics best. "I was interested in writing kind of smaller than I had been", Springsteen said.

15 "4th of July, Asbury Park (Sandy)"

1973

Carried by the seaside swell of Danny Federici's accordion and Springsteen's crystalline lead-guitar intro, this elegiac spiritual descendant of the Beach Boys' "Surfer Girl" remains one of his most moving songs. Springsteen has called it a "love note and a goodbye song" to his musical home of Asbury Park – its imagery of "carnival life on the water" is an early display of ample storytelling and scene-setting gifts. Its depiction of Seventies Asbury is certainly romanticized: "No one would ever go under the boardwalk", said then-E Street drummer Vini "Mad Dog" Lopez. "There were rats under the boardwalk!"

16 "Prove It All Night"

1978

This heroic rocker – a glorious showcase for the E Street Band and the first single released from Darkness – went through a series of changes: Springsteen's book Songs includes nine pages of handwritten revisions.

Originally, he said, "Prove It All Night" had "a chorus but few lyrics."

Explaining one of its possible inspirations, Springsteen credited a mythically gritty source: a New York cabbie he'd ridden with. "He was just talking about how ...all your life you gotta prove something to somebody", Springsteen told a concert audience in 1978. "He says, 'I gotta go home, I gotta prove it to my wife – I come to work, I gotta prove it to my boss.'"

17 "Incident on 57th Street"

1973

"'Incident' featured a theme I'd return to often in the future: the search for redemption", Springsteen said. "Over the next 20 years I'd work this one like only a good Catholic boy could." This steamy-summer, mean-streets ballad (originally titled "Puerto Rican Jane") sets up Spanish Johnny with Jane, who "sleeps in sheets damp with sweat" while her man slips out to "make a little easy money tonight." It's a sort-of test run for the expansive urban storytelling of "Jungleland", and Clemons later said that when it was played live, "you can hear the opening violin and piano intro that morphed into the opening of 'Jungleland.'"

18 - STATE TROUPER

1982

Recorded in just a single take at Springsteen's home studio, the extremely low-fi "State Trooper" is a bracing song about a paranoid criminal barreling down the New Jersey Turnpike on a rainy night. Drawing heavy inspiration from New York synth-punk duo Suicide's 1977 song "Frankie Teardrop", Springsteen plays the same droning chords on the acoustic guitar over and over as his character slowly loses his mind, then lets out an unhinged scream as the song fades. "I don't know if it's even really a song or not", Springsteen wrote in a note to Jon Landau. "It's kinda weird."

19 The Promise, 2010

Springsteen spent two years writing and recording songs for Darkness on the Edge of Town. Many were quickly tossed aside, but he kept returning to "The Promise", making slight lyric changes to the tale of two friends torn apart by a vague betrayal. Inspired by his lawsuit with former manager Mike Appel, it was eventually set aside because it was "too self-referential", but the song became a fan favorite when he added it to his live set. "There's a lot going on in those lyrics", says Van Zandt. "He's leaving it open as to who broke the promise. You have to recognize the possibility that one can break [a] promise to one's self, and compromise when maybe they shouldn't have."

20 "Tenth Avenue Freeze-Out"

1975

Even Springsteen can't explain what a Tenth Avenue Freeze-Out is. "I still have no idea", he said with a chuckle in 2005. "But it's important." Beyond the title, the song is about the formation of the E Street Band. The group had been named for only about a year by this point, but Springsteen was already crafting a mythological narrative about when "Scooter and the Big Man bust this city in half." The song also brought a new member aboard. Longtime friend Van Zandt dropped by the studio while the tune was being recorded and helped craft a horn arrangement for it. Springsteen liked what he heard, and the E Street Band had a new guitarist.

21 "I'm on Fire"

1984

When I first met Bruce, his first album wasn't out yet. I had just released my first album. The way I'd hear about his early records – it wasn't on the radio. It was my wife: "You gotta hear this guy." I think it was "Incident on 57th Street." He made those first two albums before he really blew up and everybody knew him. He's an artist that has had many major turns and awakenings. A lot of surprising stuff has happened along the way.

"I'm on Fire" is one of his most intimate songs. And it's not claiming any high ground. It's about fundamental deep-seated desire. The drums are played with a cross stick [on the snare]. He says, "I'm on fire", but he lets all this muscular playing fall away. The performance has its own power. It's something that exists in him. It's just there. And it's astonishing to see somebody who relied that much on physical power to let the music and his voice be understated like this. It's a great moment.

"My Hometown" [on this album] is the same thing. It's the same thing that had begun to happen in "Atlantic City" – beginning to recognize that you're in this place with all of these other people, that where you're from will always be with you.

It's the reverse of "Thunder Road" and "Born to Run." It's growing up. That had to happen. You couldn't go on being the outsider, rejecting everybody, believing that redemption only existed under the hood of his car. And at this point, his descriptive prowess is in full force. "I'm on Fire" is a beautifully, economically drawn picture. He has this ability to say so much in very few words.

It's interesting that Bruce never wanted to act. But what he's doing is above that. There is acting taking place – a willingness to portray. He's created a body of work that is possible to perform and act out.

By Jackson Browne

22 "Dancing in the Dark"

1984

When Jon Landau heard Born in the U.S.A., he felt something was missing. "He suggested we didn't have a single", said Springsteen. "[So] I wrote 'Dancing in the Dark.' It went as far in the direction of pop music as I wanted to go – and probably a little farther." The glossy, synth-driven song masks a story of outright desperation, but it helped reach a whole new audience (especially after Springsteen filmed a video where he dances with 20-year-old Courteney Cox), and it remains his most successful single. "It was much, much, much more produced", says Van Zandt. "I didn't like that song when I first heard it.

Much later I learned to like it."

23 "Land of Hope and Dreams"

2012

When Springsteen reunited with the E Street Band in 1999, he was determined to make the shows something more than exercises in nostalgia. The first public concert wrapped with this new song, a gospel-tinged number about a train that carries saints, sinners, whores and gamblers. After being an essential highlight of almost every Springsteen show over the previous 14 years, it finally saw an official release on 2012's Wrecking Ball. "That song was a wonderful reintroduction of what has become a very different E Street Band"says Van Zandt. "We just opened with it the other night, and the whole fucking stadium took off."

24 "Streets of Philadelphia"

1993

In 1993, Jonathan Demme asked Springsteen to write a song for his new movie about the AIDS crisis. Transposing the intimate feel of recent albums into a sonic context, he went to his home studio with a drum machine and no musicians. What emerged was a sparse, haunting ballad that flew up the charts all over the world, genuinely challenged his audience and earned him a Grammy, a Golden Globe and even an Academy Award. "To write from the perspective of someone who is emaciated, with AIDS, is to forsake all of the strength Springsteen had staked his career on", says Jackson Browne. "It is quite a feat."

25 "Stolen Car"

1980

This dark, piano-driven track was retooled several times during the River sessions; an early rendition featured the phrase "hungry heart" that Springsteen used in the song of that name. In the final version, the narrator, coping with the end of a marriage, drives off into the night. (One alternative take, included on Tracks, hints at a positive resolution.) The song, Springsteen later said, was "concerned with those [relationship] ideas: that if you don't connect yourself with your family and to the world, you feel like you're disappearing, fading away. I felt like that for a very, very long time.

Growing up, I felt invisible."

26 "Tunnel of Love"

1987

"There's a world of love there, and there's a world of fear, too.... Very often that fear feels a lot realer and certainly more urgent than the feeling of love", Springsteen said in recalling the inspiration for Tunnel of Love.

Recorded with a stripped-down version of the E Street Band at his home studio in Rumson, New Jersey, the somber title track looks boldly into that romantic anxiety (Springsteen's marriage to model-actress Julianne Phillips ended in 1988). In keeping with the song's intimate tone, the amusement-park sounds at the song's end sampled a real family (the Schiffers) riding a roller coaster in Point Pleasant, New Jersey.

27 "Highway Patrolman"

1982

"It's the thin line between stability and that moment when time stops and everything goes to black", Springsteen said of the darkest moments on Nebraska. "Highway Patrolman" shows how rich that harsh palette can be. "My name is Joe Roberts, I work for the state", he sings, opening the story of a cop chasing his criminal brother to the Canadian border, only to let him escape. The song is an Oscar-worthy drama compressed into a few hushed acoustic verses, with allusions to Vietnam and rural hardship weaved into its sibling narrative. "There are these interesting family dynamics", says Arcade Fire's Win Butler. "It's like looking through someone's old wedding photos."

28 "The Rising"

2002

Of all the haunting images to emerge from 9/11, the one that struck Springsteen the most was the one of firemen going up the stairways of the buildings. "You could be ascending a smoky staircase", Springsteen said in 2002. "You could be in the afterlife, moving – moving on." This anthemic song – told from the perspective of a rescue worker and recorded in producer Brendan O'Brien's Atlanta studio – was the first single from the first album he recorded with the E Street Band in 18 years. "You are able to project your own images onto it", says Melissa Etheridge. "I think 'The Rising' is a man coming face to face with his spirituality."

29 "Brilliant Disguise"

1987

I purchased Tunnel of Love when I was 16. I know that for most people, especially bandwagon critics, that album might have been seen as a letdown, because it had to follow the massive eclipse of Born in the U.S.A. But I've always felt it got shafted. It's his divorce album, and I love breakup records – like Marvin Gaye's Here, My Dear, or Bill Withers' +Justments, or even Richard and Linda Thompson's Shoot Out the Lights. On "Brilliant Disguise"Bruce is so open about saying it's over. Most people in the public eye go to great lengths to be private, even in the celebrity-obsessed society we live in. But he's just like, "We gave it our best shot, and it didn't work." It's unresolved. You don't get that type of honesty and vulnerability from music very often.

Last year, I spent two weeks going to Springsteen shows. I went to, like, four of them – night after night, at the Apollo, at the Garden, in Philly and in Jersey. I watched him literally climbing the walls of the Apollo. He's in his sixties! I couldn't do that, and I'm way younger than him. I started studying his catalog even more after that.

When Bruce came on Late Night With Jimmy Fallon, that was one of the most magical moments ever in the show. He's so all-inclusive, and so not full of ego. I mean, I've seen acts walk through here with, like, 12 bodyguards just to go to the bathroom. Meanwhile, Springsteen walks in our dressing room without knocking, takes a guitar and starts telling us about Nebraska. That's just him. When we performed "E Street Shuffle", he just said, "Follow my lead", and brought the audience up to dance with us. We were all out on the floor, including the entire staff – wardrobe, makeup, producers, everything.

He just has this circus-ringleader quality about him. It's awesome.

By Questlove

30 "Wreck on the Highway"

1980

This song takes its title and some of its lyric inspiration from country singer Roy Acuff's 1940s car-crash parable. It portrays the aftermath of an accident from the point of view of a witness who ponders the loss experienced by "a girlfriend or a young wife" as he sees the victim and is haunted by the wreck. After trying it in rehearsal in a country-style arrangement, Springsteen settled on a slower, brooding version highlighting Danny Federici's meditative organ. "The highway's closed at a certain point"Springsteen says of the death-obsessed song. "You have a certain amount of miles that you can make. It's a recognition of mortality."

31 "New York City Serenade"

1973

"My romantic ideas and fantasies of New York City", was how Springsteen described this song and "Incident on 57th Street." The 10-minute epic – the longest track on any Springsteen studio album – combined fragments of two earlier songs, "New York City Song" and "Vibes Man" (the latter of which contained images of domestic violence that Springsteen edited out). Arranged by David Sancious, who played its sweeping, jazzy piano lead, it's full of Mean Streets imagery, spooled out over a song that bridges Dylanesque storytelling, doo-wop and Latin jazz via Richard Blackwell's subtle conga playing.

32 "Because the Night"

2010

In 1977, Springsteen was working on an early version of this cathedral-size passion play when Patti Smith, recording in the same studio, heard about it from producer Jimmy Iovine. Iovine, who was working with both musicians, brought Smith a demo of the song, and Smith added her own lyrics, recording it for her album Easter, and scoring her first and biggest hit single. "Bruce did the hook, Patti the words and we [the Smith band] gave it the cannon-blast beat", said Smith's guitarist Lenny Kaye. Springsteen's excellent studio version wasn't officially released until The Promise, more than 30 years later.

33 "Spirit in the Night"

1973

When Columbia Records president Clive Davis asked Springsteen to write more radio-friendly tunes for his debut, he quickly came back with two songs: "Blinded by the Light" and this teenage fairy tale about kids escaping out to Greasy Lake. Of all the tracks on Greetings From Asbury Park, "Spirit" hints most closely at the (still-unnamed) E Street Band's future direction, thanks to the nearly nonstop use of Clemons' saxophone – until these final sessions for the album, Springsteen hadn't even been able to locate Clemons to get him into the studio. The song's swaying bass line was played by Bruce himself.

34 "Adam Raised a Cain"

1978

"I don't make 'em up", Springsteen said in reference to the songs he's written about conflicts with his father, Douglas – a withdrawn working-class guy who shared Bruce's struggles with depression. "Adam Raised a Cain" is a pile driver, featuring a remarkably heavy groove and some of Springsteen's most searing guitar work. The bitter lyrics (partially inspired by Elia Kazan's 1955 film East of Eden) give father-son tension an almost biblical depth: "You're born into this life paying for the sins of somebody else's past", he sings. Before his death in 1998, the elder Springsteen was asked which of his son's songs he liked best. "The ones about me", he answered.

35 "Tougher Than the Rest"

1987

Night after night, on the Tunnel of Love tour, this subtle ballad made for a singularly intimate duet between Springsteen and his future wife, Patti Scialfa. "I couldn't have written any of those songs at any other point in my career", Springsteen said at the time. "I wouldn't have had the knowledge or the insight or the experience to do it." Spare and tense, "Tougher Than the Rest" is about an emotionally bruised couple meeting at a bar, each hoping this time will be different. "This song is unusual in that it applies this macho way of talking to something sensitive", says Win Butler of Arcade Fire.

"But it's even better hearing Patti sing it live with Bruce."

36 "Shut Out the Light"

1984

For anyone wondering if "Born in the U.S.A." was an endorsement or a condemnation of the American dream, all they had to do was flip the single over and play its gripping B side. "Shut Out the Light" took inspiration from the book Born on the Fourth of July, by Vietnam veteran Ron Kovic. Over a supple acoustic backdrop and Soozie Tyrell's violin, Springsteen sings about Vietnam's hellish psychological aftermath. (He removed two verses, one of which alluded to the protagonist's drug problem.) Performing the song in stadiums during the Born in the U.S.A. tour, he said, "This song is about leaving home and not being able to find your way back."

37 "No Surrender"

1984

Springsteen recorded this defiant anthem at the very end of the Born in the U.S.A. sessions, but he was hesitant to include it on the album, feeling its lyrics were misleadingly romantic. "You don't hold out and triumph all the time in life", he said. "You compromise, you suffer defeat." But Van Zandt convinced him otherwise. "It had a little bit of the 'Born to Run' swagger, if you will, and he was concerned he was being a little bit redundant with it"he said. "I just said, 'Look, there are certain things, certain themes, certain emotions that it's OK to be redundant with.... Rock & roll is redundant by definition, to be honest.'"

38 "For You"

1973

An early example of Springsteen's gift for character-driven story-songs: In the back of an ambulance, the narrator talks with his girlfriend, who may have attempted suicide. Some believe it's based on his ex Diane Lozito; Springsteen – who calls the song one of his "twisted autobiographies" – says he "changed names to protect the guilty." Onstage, he introduced it by saying, "Back in 1971 ...I was breaking up with this girlfriend of mine, and when I was away one weekend, she came and painted all the walls of my room black.... That's not true ...she painted 'em all blue."

39 "My City of Ruins"

2002

Springsteen debuted "My City of Ruins" in December 2000 at a pair of Christmas shows in his adopted hometown of Asbury Park, which had fallen on hard times since its heyday as a picturesque beach town. But the song took on a new meaning when he performed a gospel-tinged rendition (with just a few lyric tweaks) at a TV telethon for the victims of 9/11, and it served as a devastating closing track to The Rising, recalling the Band's "The Weight." In 2012, the song took on yet another meaning when it became a nightly tribute to Clemons on the Wrecking Ball tour. The "City of Ruins" was now the E Street Band itself.

40 - YOUNGSTOWN 1995

Springsteen's response to the economic devastation of the Reagan years came in the form of this tense portrait of an unemployed steelworker who sees the opportunities of his father dying away. The lyrics were inspired by the book Journey to Nowhere: The Saga of the New Underclass: "I put it down and I laid awake and I thought, 'What if somebody came and told me that the one thing I could do, well, that wasn't necessary anymore and how would I come home at night and face my family?'" The arrangement, featuring pedal steel guitarist Marty Rifkin and Soozie Tyrell's haunting violin, is as intensely brooding as Springsteen's lyrics.

41 "If I Should Fall Behind"

1992

As hushed and solemn as a hymn, Springsteen's ballad from Lucky Town was a tender letter of devotion to wife Scialfa, as they navigated a new life (the couple had their first child in 1990 and were married in 1991). "You and I know what this world can do/So let's make our steps clear that the other may see", he sang. As Springsteen told a 1992 crowd in California, "This is my best song about making even small connections." To achieve that intimate feel, Springsteen played every instrument himself on the track save for the drums, which fell to ex-Steve Miller Band member Gary Mallaber.

42 "Meeting Across the River"

1975

Springsteen dashed off "Meeting Across the River" in "about an hour." But he wasn't that fond of it. His then-manager Mike Appel claims he had to lobby to get the song on Born to Run. "That's a great song", he told Springsteen.

"Reminds me of Naked City." Roy Bittan's somber late-night piano figure and Randy Brecker's noir trumpet back a short, open-ended tale about small-time hoods going across the Hudson to do a deal. "That two grand's practically sitting here in my pocket", Springsteen sings, though you get the sense that's not how the night will end. The suggestive track even birthed a 2005 short- story collection in which various authors took inspiration from Springsteen's shadowy tale.

43 "Wrecking Ball"

2012

Bruce wrote this song for our final shows at Giants Stadium in 2009 before they tore it down. It's one of those road songs written for the band. They tend to take on a very comfortable arrangement because they're being written for the live band and with the live band. It's not like he's going home in between and writing it and demo'ing it and showing it to the band later. He's playing us the song backstage on his acoustic guitar, just like the old days.

Songs like that take on a different sort of immediacy because they're literally being worked up at soundcheck.

But it's become a bigger song than merely about a physical wrecking ball. We had a long conversation about whether it should be the title of our last album. I thought once it's elevated to the title of the album it actually will take on an additional metaphorical significance that can turn around the defensive negative implications of a wrecking ball smashing a structure or metaphorically smashing one's past or history or dreams. There's some of that in there. The song begins to say, "We are now the wrecking ball. We're out here wrecking your passivity. We're wrecking your acceptance of mediocrity.

We're out here living it with you in the pouring rain, we're not afraid of anything. Bring on the wrecking ball." In order to be reborn, one must die.

That's what it became.

I think it's a great example of how good craft becomes art. I really believe that is how most of it happens. It's rare that someone sets out to do something that is great art and actually succeeds at it. Most of the time that's not the thought. Bruce certainly does that more than most.

By Steven Van Zandt

44 "Downbound Train"

1984

Like "Born in the U.S.A.", "Downbound Train" was a song from the Nebraska demo. Yet despite a slow, hard-bitten feel that's keeping with the mood of Nebraska, it was actually first written as a jumpy rockabilly tune, over which Springsteen dubbed an echoing moan. The slowed-down version he eventually went with brings out the desolation in lyrics about a guy bouncing from job to job as he ­watches his life fall apart. The song was recorded at New York's Power Station studio during one of the early Born in the U.S.A. sessions, with the demo's moan mirrored in Roy Bittan's brooding synth. "It has a kind of plainspoken poetry that ties it to great country music", says

Melissa Etheridge.

45 "Candy's Room"

1978

Darkness on the Edge of Town is full of morose and lost characters, but Candy may be the saddest. In interviews, Springsteen refuses to admit that she's a prostitute, but it's pretty clear why she has "fancy clothes and diamond rings" and "men who give her anything she wants." (In "Candy's Boy", a tortured ballad Springsteen demo'ed during the Darkness sessions, he sings from the perspective of Candy's jilted boyfriend.) "Candy's Room" has torrid guitars and a tightly coiled beat that brings out its dark urgency. "There's something really romantic about that one", says Craig Finn of the Hold Steady.

"It's like a rocket ship that blasts out of somewhere private into the world."

46 "This Hard Land"

1995

"We recorded about 80 songs for Born in the U.S.A. Some of them are great"said Max Weinberg. "'This Hard Land', which didn't make it on the record, is just fantastic. That's probably my favorite song we've done." The song's mix of stark Dust Bowl folk and swirling Jersey Shore barroom rock is a perfect split between that LP's rave-up Americana and the dark acoustic demos of Nebraska. It didn't appear on either album. But it became a concert staple and was rerecorded in 1995 for Greatest Hits; the folk-rockier, superior original surfaced later on Tracks. "I don't understand how I could let it be unreleased for so long", Springsteen said in 1998.

47 "Lost in the Flood"

1973

With its images of returning veterans, Chevy races and post-Vietnam America beginning to erode, this grand, apocalyptic parable foreshadows themes Springsteen would explore throughout his career. It was, he says, about "trying to get a feeling for ...the forces that affected my parents' lives ...the whole thing of the wasted life." (Tellingly, he performed it during the Vote for Change concert in 2004.) The recording also marks Van Zandt's first appearance on a Springsteen album: Although he didn't play guitar, Van Zandt supplied the sound-effects blast that opens the song.

48 "Growin' Up"

1973

Few songs in rock capture coming-of-age swagger and wonderment like this ode to Springsteen's adolescence – that period when he was, as the song goes, "the cosmic kid in full costume dress." And the music, pushed along by David Sancious' elegant piano and Vini "Mad Dog" Lopez's drums, is a heady rush.

This was one of the handful of tunes Springsteen played for Columbia Records honchos during his 1972 audition for the label, and he would often preface it in concert with a wry take on that meeting: "There was Clive Davis, the head of the company, dressed in a white robe and a wreath on his head. I fell to my knees and played the guitar."

49 "Johnny 99"

1982

In September 1984, after Ronald Reagan misappropriated "Born in the U.S.A."

for his re-election campaign, Springsteen took his revenge onstage. "The president was mentioning my name the other day, and I kinda got to wondering what his favorite album musta been", he said in Pittsburgh one night. "I don't think it was the Nebraska album." Then he ripped into "Johnny 99" – the pitch- dark tale of a laid-off autoworker who kills a man in a moment of drunken despair, then begs a judge for understanding. "Johnny 99" is supposed to inspire empathy, not horror: "You kinda just gotta know what that feels like, somewhere", Springsteen said of the song.

50 "Death to My Hometown"

2012

"It sounds like an Irish rebel song, but it's all about what happened four years ago", Springsteen said to Jon Stewart in 2012 about the fiery third single from Wrecking Ball, a devastating indictment of a society that no longer cares about the working class. Springsteen sings some of his angriest lyrics ever over a Celtic-rock stomp, indicting "the greedy thieves who came around/And ate the flesh of everything they found." The musical adventurousness fit a theme he wanted to run through Wrecking Ball. "I used a lot of music from the 1800s and the 1930s to show these things are cyclical"Spring­steen explained at the time. "The album is resonant with history."

51 "One Step Up"

1987

The dissolution of Springsteen's first marriage, to Julianne Phillips, which echoed through the pensive Tunnel of Love, is particularly present in this downcast ballad: "Another fight and I slam the door on/Another battle in our dirty little war", he sings. Adding to the mood of isolation, Springsteen played all the instruments himself on this track (which was recorded in Los Angeles in the summer of 1987), with only future wife Scialfa joining in to sing a lovely harmony. Of the songs he was writing at the time, Springsteen said, "I thought, 'OK, we're growing up together, me and my audience', and I took that idea seriously."

52 "I'm Goin' Down"

1984

This fun, straightforward rocker almost didn't make it onto Born in the U.S.A.

– "It was either this or 'Pink Cadillac'," Springsteen said years later when introducing it live. The song ended up being the sixth Top 10 single from the album (even though some heard it as an allusion to oral sex). Despite it being one of his catchiest songs, Springsteen has always seemed somewhat ambivalent about its relatively simple depiction of romantic distress. Since the Born in the U.S.A. tour, the E Street Band has rarely played it live. At one of its rare concert appearances, he jokingly called it "one of my more insightful songs about men and women."

53 "Hungry Heart"

1980

Springsteen's first top 10 hit was almost the one that got away: He initially planned to give the song to the Ramones (after seeing them at a club in Asbury Park), until Jon Landau successfully argued that he'd be crazy not to keep it for himself. Landau was right, of course. The lyrics, about a guy who walks out on his wife and kids, are actually pretty dark, but you'd never know it from the sunny Beach Boys melody and arrangement; co-producer Chuck Plotkin sped up the tape on the track so Springsteen's voice would sound higher. "It just had this groove", Van Zandt said. "So I said, 'Let's get some extra-high harmony on it.'"

54 "Streets of Fire"

1978

Though the Darkness sessions were driven by Springsteen's huge backlog of material post-Born to Run, "Streets of Fire" was actually written in the studio. It's one of his bluesiest, most desolate tracks. Producers of a noirish 1984 rock movie titled Streets of Fire wanted to use a version of the song by the New Wave band Face to Face, but Springsteen turned them down – and wisely so, since the film tanked.

55 "Independence Day"

1980

This pensive ballad was one of several from this period that detailed Springsteen's famously fraught relationship with his father. "He was always just sitting at the kitchen table at night, drinking too much, or off at work", Springsteen told an audience in 1981 when introducing the song. "It took us 30 years to be able to tell each other that we loved each other."

Clemons' brief solo adds a powerful blast of emotional catharsis.

56 "Lucky Town"

1992

"I wrote and recorded that whole record in three weeks in my house"Springsteen said of Lucky Town. The understated title track was a moving celebration of hard-won romantic salvation, with Springsteen playing every instrument except drums, handled by sturdy session man Gary Mallaber. The calmly rocking tone of "Lucky Town" fit Springsteen's mood. "These are the stories I have to tell", he said. "This is what's important in my life right now."

57 "Girls in Their Summer Clothes"

2007

This lovely song has what Jon Landau called "a Pet Sounds feeling mixed with the E Street Band." Springsteen undercuts a radiant melody and producer Brendan O'Brien's lush orchestration with melancholic lyrics about aging amid youthful beauty – "girls on the Jersey Shore with their little short-shorts and bleach-blond hair", says Best Coast's Bethany Cosentino.

58 "Loose Ends"

1998

"Loose Ends" was going to be the final song on The Ties That Bind, the album- in-progress that Springsteen decided to scrap in 1979 because it "seem[ed] inadequate." Van Zandt reportedly argued for it to be included on The River, to no avail. The harrowing rocker about a fading relationship didn't get an official release until the Tracks box, two decades after it was recorded.

59 - REASON TO BELIEVE-

1982

The closing song on Nebraska is a thin ray of hope, a driving, soulful song in which Springsteen expresses amazement that people can keep their faith despite the harsh reality of everyday life. "Sometimes people need something to believe in so bad that they'll believe in anything that comes along – just so that they got some reason to believe", Springsteen said while introducing the song live.

60-You're Missing

2002

Cut in 1994, this tense track was shelved and then revived and rewritten after 9/11, when its title phrase became even more evocative of those who died that day. Along with "Into the Fire", "You're Missing" sparked ideas for other songs: "I'd come up with one, and that would lead to another and lead to another and lead to another", said Springsteen. "Then you start to tell a story.... You're soul-mining."

61 - Point Blank 1980

Talking about the ways in which rock & roll can capture joy as well as bleakness, Springsteen once said, "How could a happy song like 'Sherry Darling' coexist with 'Point Blank' ...?" Swept along by Roy Bittan's dramatic piano, this grand passion-play ballad was indeed one of Springsteen's gloomiest relationship songs. Although he's never discussed who inspired it, it's long assumed the woman in the song is an ex who dealt with drug problems.

62- Radio Nowhere 2007

"It's a little more sonically guitar-driven than any past Bruce album", Jon Landau said of Magic. The album's opening track set the tone: "Radio Nowhere"

rides waves of guitar noise in a place of isolation and hunger. Its desperate energy locked into feelings of Bush-era helplessness and rage. "I have something to say not just to your dad or your older brother", Springsteen said. "I have something to say to you, if you're 15 or 16 years old, about right now."

63- She's The One 1975

A pounding, fifties-influenced song about a coldhearted woman, "She's the One"

rides a Bo Diddley beat ("the beat of the universe", as Springsteen called it introducing the song live) and really takes off during Clemons' towering sax solo; Springsteen later said that he wrote the song so he could hear the solo he heard in his head. It's also the song Roy Bittan played along to when he auditioned for the E Street Band.

64- American Skin 2001

This song was bizarrely thought to be controversial in the wake of the police murder of Amadou Diallo in 1999. Bruce played it once in a show in Atlanta, and then it got this huge reaction in the New York press. One of the themes in the song was, sometimes when you're black in the United States, you get shot by police officers. As if that's a controversial thing to report in a song.

Bruce is able to distill universal themes into these small narratives, and "American Skin" is certainly a case. It's a song that, I think, transcends the crime. I went to the last Madison Square Garden show of that reunion tour, and there was some controversy with the local law enforcement, a scenario that I was very familiar with at the time. Backstage, I told Bruce, "Welcome on board!" I was impressed by his courage. He played that song every night of the homestand and did it so fearlessly.

By Tom Morello

65- Walk Like A Man 1987

This might be the most tender song Springsteen has written about his father – "All I can think of is being five years old following behind you at the beach/Tracing your footprints in the sand/Trying to walk like a man", he sings, then reflects on his shaky emotions as his dad watched him get married.

Springsteen said the song was about "struggling toward some tenuous commitment, knowing that when you make that stand, the clock starts."

66- Glory Days 1984

Originally, "Glory Days" had a downcast verse about Springsteen's dad, who "ain't never had glory days" – but Bruce removed it, preserving the song's light tone of wry nostalgia. "Occasionally, you need some comic relief", said Van Zandt, who improvised the climactic mandolin solo into his vocal mic. "I wanted to get a merry-go-round organ sound, like a roller rink", Springsteen said. "That's a happy sound."

67-Seeds 1986

Initially known as "Gone Gone Gone", this Born in the U.S.A. outtake became a political centerpiece of the subsequent tour, as can be heard on Live/1975-85, where it gets packaged alongside Edwin Starr's "War", "The River" and "Born in the U.S.A.", drawing a grim American picture. "These four songs together were telling different things", Jon Landau said of the live set piece. "Things never heard before on any of our albums."

68- You're Own Worst Enemy 2007

As with "Girls in Their Summer Clothes", Springsteen and Brendan O'Brien created a "big pop production" – with lyrics that implicitly tap the mood of a nation that has lost its moral compass post-Iraq War. "It's all about self- subversion", Springsteen said. "You can take it personally or politically.

That's what gives the record its tension, those two things – the perfect pop universe and then what's at its center."

69- Cadillac Ranch 1980

After an initial stab at cutting The River, Springsteen took a break – and, after resuming work, out came this party-ready rocker. It's a pivotal song – combining a rousing arrangement with darker lyrics that use the real-life Cadillac Ranch (a Texas art project where 10 Caddys are half-buried) as a metaphor for death. Before that, he said, "I hadn't figured out a way to synthesize it into one song."

70- Lucky Town 1992

One of the few Springsteen songs to feature an American Idol judge – that's Randy Jackson on bass – this Lucky Town rocker is Springsteen's roaring anthem about the satisfaction he'd found with Scialfa in the early Nineties.

Featuring one of his most strenuous vocals, it also sees him poke deprecating fun at his own myth: "And it's a sad, funny ending to find yourself pretending/A rich man in a poor man's shirt."

71- Jack of All Trades 2012

Like most of the songs on Wrecking Ball, "Jack of All Trades" is about the Great Recession's disproportionate impact on the working class. "The banker man grows fat", he sings. "Working man grows thin. It's all happened before and it'll happen again." The brokenhearted song picks up at the end with a searing guitar solo by Tom Morello. "You cannot have a social contract with the enormous income disparity", Springsteen told Jon Stewart in 2012.

72- Gypsy Biker 2007

Although it doesn't get into specifics, this jittery, high-voltage song has often been interpreted as the emotional funeral of a soldier returning from Afghanistan or Iraq. "We kind of live in Orwellian times where what's true can be made to seem a lie, and what's a lie can be made to seem true", he said, introducing the song in New Jersey in 2007 – right in the midst of those two wars.

73- Rocky Ground 2012

The righteously angry Wrecking Ball takes a turn toward redemption on this groove-driven song. It's fueled by decades of African-American music – from a sample of a Forties gospel choir to Nineties-flavored hip-hop loops and, in a first for Springsteen, an actual rap verse, written by him and delivered by duet partner Michelle Moore. Fittingly, the song had its live debut at New York's Apollo Theater.

74- Johnny Bye Bye 1985

The title is a homage to Chuck Berry's "Bye Bye Johnny", but this stripped- down Born in the U.S.A. outtake (later issued as a B side to "I'm on Fire") is about Elvis Presley. Springsteen was devastated by his death in 1977; the song took three years to write. "The type of fame Elvis had ...the pressure of it, the isolation that it seems to require, has gotta be really painful"Springsteen said.

75- We Are Alive 2012

Springsteen was nearly done with Wrecking Ball when he realized it could use one song to wrap it up. "I needed a strange kind of party", he said. "A party filled with ghosts. It's a party filled with the dead, but whose voices and spirit and ideas remain with us." Max Weinberg said they originally cut the song sort of like the Ramones would have, but they eventually settled on a folkier vibe, built around a horn riff borrowed from Johnny Cash's "Ring of Fire."

76- Roulette 1988

This outtake from The River sessions emerged in 1988 as the B side to "One Step Up." By then its frenetic spitfire tale of a desperate man trying to save his family after the Three Mile Island nuclear disaster took on a chilling new meaning following the Chernobyl meltdown. Explaining why he left it off The River, Spring­steen said, "Maybe ...I thought it was too specific."

77- Two Faces 1987

"Two Faces" is the bleakest song on Tunnel of Love, with Springsteen singing about making his wife cry and destroying the relationship. "I wanted to write a different kind of romantic song", he said. "One that took in the different types of emotional experiences of any relationship where you are really engaging with that person and not involved in a narcissistic romantic fantasy or intoxication or whatever."

78- My Hometown 1984

"I used to think that once I got out of town, I was never going to come back"Springsteen said of his native Freehold, New Jersey, where he grew up. "I realized I would always carry a part of that town with me no matter where I went or what I did." Springsteen was living in California when he wrote "My Hometown", a scathing indictment of post-industrial America. Originally titled "Your Hometown", it was demo'ed as a speedy rockabilly tune.

79- The Ties That Bind 1980

Springsteen's love for mid-Sixties garage rock and British Invasion hits runs through the opening track from The River. Although Springsteen is a meticulous record-maker, this song was cut fast, in a day, to retain its freshness. "I knew I wanted more of the roughness and spontaneity of our live show"Springsteen wrote in Songs, describing his approach to The River. "I was determined to let the band play live and let the music happen."

80- Out in The Street 1980

Springsteen's homage to The Easybeat's " Friday On My Mind, "Out in the Street" turns the one-take bar-band feel Springsteen wanted for The River into what might be his most unencumbered declaration of freedom through community.

Van Zandt, who became a co-producer on the album, shares euphoric vocals, and Max Weinberg's clarion song-opening shot more than meets Springsteen's demand: "I wanted the snare drum to explode."

81- Night 1975

"The characters on Born to Run were less eccentric and less local than on Greetings and ...Innocent", Springsteen wrote in Songs. "They could have been anybody and everybody." That's certainly true of "Night": The only song on Born to Run under three minutes, it's an archetypal straight-ahead car song with a Chuck Berry-esque opening line Springsteen grafted from a 1970 Steel Mill song called "Oh Mama."

82- Drive All Night 1980

Springsteen first recorded the hypnotic "Drive All Night" for Darkness on the Edge of Town, but it had little chance of making that album: A lengthy, soul- based love song, it didn't mesh with Darkness' concise tracks. He inserted bits of "Drive All Night" into live versions of "Backstreets" and found room for it on The River. Until 1999's "Land of Hope and Dreams", it seemed like it would be the last of his sprawling epics.

83- Lonesome Day 2002

With this driving E Street showcase, Springsteen found a way to combine his more personal Nineties songwriting with a broader outlook (and to replace his overused synths with violin). "The first verse, it feels like it's a guy who's talking to his girl", he said. "The second verse ...I switched out of this personal thing to this sort of overall emotional mood and the feelings that were in the air in the States. But ...one thing works with the other."

84- Pink Cadillac 1984

Combining an image from Elvis Presley's "Baby Let's Play House" with a lean rockabilly rhythm, Springsteen emerged with one of his sexiest tracks. "This is a song about the conflict between worldly things and spiritual health, between desires of the flesh and spiritual ecstasy", he once said onstage. It was the B side to "Dancing in the Dark", and Natalie Cole had a surprise hit with the song in 1988.

85- Fade Away 1980

Springsteen described the mood of this hushed, agonized ballad as follows: "Have you ever felt a love that you've had slipping away? That is an ugly feeling. You don't know what you can do to fix it, probably nothing." The song also suggests heartbroken girl-group pop, and the choked, almost adenoidal vocals borrow from Elvis Costello circa "Alison." It's one of Van Zandt's favorite Springsteen songs.

86- Restless Nights 1998

In the summer of 1979, Springsteen practically wore out his cassette of Raspberries' Best. "They were great little pop records – I loved the production, and when I went into the studio, a lot of the things we did were like that", he recalled. "Two-, three-, four-minute pop songs, coming one after another." One of the best of his power-pop nuggets is this outtake from The River – few other artists would toss aside such a perfectly catchy chorus.

87- Bobby Jean 1984

"If you got a good friend out here ...that means something to you, this is for you, 'cause there ain't nothing like it", Springsteen said, introducing this song in 1984. This Born in the U.S.A. rocker was widely seen as his farewell to Van Zandt, who left the band just before the album's release (but returned about 15 years later). The song's aching nostalgia is summed up in one of Clemons' most evocative sax solos.

88- Devils and Dust 2005

Devils & Dust, 2005

Much of Devils & Dust was written during the Tom Joad tour, but the title track was inspired by the Iraq War. "It is basically a song about a soldier's point of view", Springsteen said. "But it kind of opens up to a lot of other interpretations." It was attempted as an angry rocker and a ballad, before Brendan O'Brien found a middle ground. Said Springsteen, "It picks up a little instrumental beef as it goes."

89- Blinded By The Light 1973

Springsteen wrote this in hopes of meeting his label's desire for a hit – and in fact Manfred Mann took it to Number One three years later. Springsteen has described the track – written with "a rhyming dictionary in one hand and a notebook in the other" – as a sort of coded autobiography: "I wanted to get blinded by the light, I wanted to do things I hadn't done, see things I hadn't seen."

90- Back In Your Arms 1998

The 1995 documentary Blood Brothers shows Springsteen and a reunited E Street Band painstakingly working on this song. After it finally ended up on Tracks, fans fell in love with its sad, organ-fueled recollection of a past love. When the group played it on the 1999 reunion tour, it seemed Springsteen was singing about his bandmates in the line "all the love I've thrown away and lost."

91- Ramrod 1980

"Ramrod" isn't exactly Springsteen's deepest song. It's simply a barnburner about a hard-working guy looking to take a pretty girl on a drive. "His cleanest, coolest, purest track", said superfan Stephen King. The song explodes onstage, often stretching into the 10-minute range with false stops and James Brown-like collapses, causing Van Zandt to "revive" the fallen Springsteen.

92- Sad Eyes 1998

Recorded shortly after Springsteen had broken up the E Street Band and relocated to L.A., this rarity wasn't released until eight years after it was recorded. Studio musicians like bassist Randy Jackson and Toto drummer Jeff Porcaro give it a modern feel. It also harks back to rock's past, from a lyric that could have been in any number of lovelorn Fifties hits to Springsteen's falsetto. "I tried to write something that was soul-oriented", he said.

93- The E Street Shuffle 1973

The slippery junkyard funk of this track, complete with clavinet, tuba, bongos and a horn riff interpolated from Major Lance's "The Monkey Time", is utterly unlike the stadium stomp that would become the E Street Band's signature. Few songs give a better sense of what the earliest incarnations of the group sounded like live. Says Craig Finn, "The way he references the band, it's like a mission statement."

94- If I Were The Priest 1972

The first time Springsteen met John Hammond, the legendary talent scout asked whether he had any songs that he would never perform live. Springsteen responded with this cowboy ballad about a town where Jesus is the sheriff and the Virgin Mary runs the Holy Grail Saloon. "When he sang that song", Hammond later recalled, "I knew he could only be Catholic."

95- All That Heaven Will Allow 1987

Like so many of the great songs on Tunnel of Love, "All That Heaven Will Allow" lays bare the hope and fear of a man in love. Springsteen sings about steps in a couple's life together – a date in a nightclub, sharing a house, the dread of dying too young. He even tries to talk his way past a nightclub bouncer ("Come on, Slim, slip me in, man"). The song became a centerpiece of the 1988 tour, with a long introduction co-starring Clemons and set on a park bench.

96- Long Walk Home 2007

"Long Walk Home" reflects a turbulent time in America, marked by economic decline, constitutional decay and endless foreign wars. It's no accident that this is the song Springsteen quoted when he endorsed Barack Obama for president in 2008. "He speaks to the America I've envisioned in my music for the past 35 years", Springsteen said. "A place where 'nobody crowds you, and nobody goes it alone.'"

97- County Fair 2003

Cut in 1983, this song didn't get its first official release for another 20 years. And though "County Fair" was written in the wake of Nebraska, it feels worlds away from that album's stark hard-luck tales. It opens with acoustic guitar and the sound of crickets chirping, as Spring­steen sings about small- town romance on a summer evening, riding the roller coaster and dancing to a local band called James Young and the Immortal Ones.

98- Brothers Under The Bridge 1998

There's a Springsteen song with a nearly identical title: an uptempo E Street rave-up left off Born in the U.S.A. This "Brothers" is entirely different, a stripped-down Vietnam ballad that puts all the pain up front. Over military drum taps, Springsteen sings about a homeless vet who hides out with other men like him at a California campsite, trying to avoid the highway patrol and his own memories.

99- American Land 2012

Originally recorded during The Seeger Sessions in 2006, "American Land" turns a poem written by a 19th-century steelworker (and set to music by Pete Seeger) into Springsteen's version of a Pogues song. It's a rowdy Irish jig celebrating the American-immigrant experience, the Celtic strain in the roots- rock tradition and the unbridled joy of performing, in this land or any other.

100- Fire 1986

One of Springsteen's most covered tunes (it's been done by everyone from Cher to Link Wray), "Fire" was written in 1977 to be sung by Elvis Presley; as Spring­steen has said, "I sent [Elvis] a demo of it, but he died before it arrived." The Pointer Sisters' rendition became a Number Two hit, but Springsteen's take on Live/1975-85 ignites the Fifties-style torch song's soft-loud dynamic like no one else's.
