---
title: "Reading Springsteen's Lyrics: Searching For The Ghost Of Tom Joad"
author: "Anna Bayo Ibars"
source: "Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona"
date: "2011-09-01"
category: "Thesis"
---

The lyrics on The Ghost of Tom Joad will be analysed by taking into account the epic narrative told through the narrator or other characters. Parallelisms between Springsteen's album and Steinbeck's The Grapes of Wrath will be established in reference to content. Springsteen's opinion and other meanings underlying the text will also be commented on.

Springsteen's album begins with the lyric of "The Ghost of Tom Joad" giving name to the album which stands for an adapted version of Steinbeck's Grapes into a folk song. The lyrics of the album allow the reader to tour through unseen America border towns and stop in places where different characters migrate in search of a job, a home, or where fate brings them.

"The Ghost of Tom Joad" acts as an opening scene and also as a closing one which offers an accurate cinematic adaptation of Steinbeck's novel. The verses of the chorus will be used to divide this part of the dissertation in three sections, each of them introducing different lyrics while connecting them to The Grapes through their subjects. Under the three main headlines we will be searching, waiting and finally finding "The Ghost of Tom Joad".

** . "SEARCHING FOR THE GHOST"**

```
Men walkin' long the railroad tracks
Goin' someplace there's no goin' back
Highway patrol choppers comin' up over the ridge
Hot soup on a campfire under the bridge
```

Springsteen's version of "The Ghost of Tom Joad" begins with a harsh portrayal where thousands of men are walking along a railroad, heading for a place they do not know if they are going to come back. They represent these thousands of displaced

"Searching for the Ghost of Tom Joad":

Resurrecting Steinbeck's Gaze people in the world today who are living in shelters, eating in campfires, experiencing the humiliation of having been forced to get away from their countries for any political, religious or economical reason. The lyrics tell about the details, routines and daily activities of these homeless, placeless among a total misery and in this case, Springsteen is telling about Mexican migrants trying to cross the American border. Just some authorities like highway patrols appear, but we do not know if they are going to help them.

As it happens in the story of "The Line", Carl, an ex-military man from Fort Irwin, whose wife died, takes a job as a Californian Border Patrol (San Diego) to prevent Mexican from crossing a passage to Southern California cities. He becomes friend with Bobby Ramirez, a Mexican immigrant who always says: They risk death in the deserts and mountains pay all they got to the smugglers rings We send'em home and they come night back again, Carl, hunger is a powerful thing".

Bobby Ramirez is conscious that the desperate jumpers risk their lives many times in search of food or a job, paying all the money they have to smugglers while relying on them to survive. The only purpose is not dying of hunger.

Later in the story, Carl, the narrator, reaffirms he is doing what he is told to do as a patrolman, which consists in waiting at night, hidden in the canyon, trying to chase drugs runners, farmers with families, women and children with the objective of keeping them from crossing the line.

We do not know what Carl really thinks of his job and about the migrants until the day he meets an attractive Mexican woman to whom he feels a mixture of attraction, empathy, and understanding toward her and her situation. At a given moment, Carl neglects his duties trying to help her and she escapes through the arroyo. But on the highway, Bobby's jeep comes out and then it is when Carl says: \_ I felt myself movin' Felt my gun restin' neath my hand We stood there starin" at each other As off through the arroyo she ran"\_.

Bobby Ramirez never said anything although he could have prevented the woman from escaping, in fact, it was his job and responsibility as authority, but Carl also himself stopped from doing anything wrong to Ramirez as both understood the situation. Bobby because of his condition of being a Mexican immigrant himself, and Carl as his conscience was fighting between doing what he had been told to do and what he was feeling for the woman. At the end of the story, Carl, decides to leave the job and track down the woman in Tijuana's area (Mexican state of Baja California).

A single connection with the woman changed Carl's sense of existence and his vision of a future life. His job did not fulfil him; he could not be in peace with himself just giving orders to those people who were tempting to cross the border into a land that long time ago belonged to Mexico16 as Springsteen himself states in his The Ghost of Tom Joad 's tour.

Carl's character grows spiritually responding with physical assistance to the others when he realises what is happening. "The Line" divides physically Mexico from the States and also divides people with the same needs but with different skin or social background.

According to The Grapes, Steinbeck would also remember: "Once California belonged to Mexico, and its land to Mexicans; and a horde of tattered feverish Americans poured in. And such was their hunger for land that they took the land... and they guarded with guns the land they had stolen" .

And then: "the dispossessed were drawn west -from Kansas, Oklahoma, Texas, New Mexico; from Nevada and Arkansas, tribes, dusted out, tractored out. Carloads, caravans, homeless and hungry...", all of them following the well-known " highway 66" as the main migrant road trying to escape from the degrading homeless, jobless conditions. Obviously, patrols, deputies and other people representing some kind of authority were completely inaccessible most of the times acting as if they were the owners of the land insulting and degrading the migrants. One example is the case of the deputy near Tulare (California): "We ain't gonna have no goddamn Okies in this town" ; or the service-station boy that the Joads met on the road with in his white uniform commenting to a friend: "...They ain't human. A human being wouldn't live

Between 1846-48 the Mexican government had to give half of its territory to the USA (Treaty of Guadalupe-Hidalgo)

**"STILL SEARCHING FOR THE GHOST"**

Shelter line stretchin' round the corner Welcome to the new world order Families sleepin' in their cars in the southwest No home no job no peace no rest like they do. A human being couldn't stand it to be so dirty and miserable.

They ain't a hell of a lot better than gorillas"(221).

Other deputy sheriffs used "shotguns patrolling the lines so a man might not pick an orange for a thin child, oranges to be dumped if the price was low" (234) or even shouted to them: "This ain't your land. You're trespassing ...You goddamned squatters. Pretty soon you'd think you owned it" (235), as if the land belonged to them.

As David Masciotra would say in The Progressive Political Vision of Bruce Springsteen: "As long as homeless and desperately poor are invisible to the eye, they are also invisible to the pen used to sign local, state, federal budget" (78). This is in fact what happened to these Okies that in spite of a New Deal Programme settled by the president at the time in order to assist them, the most of the laws were not applied caused of the bad use of authority in the hands of the ones mentioned before. The only exception being the treatment given at Weedpatch camp, in The Grapes.

Springsteen seems to reflect in his "Youngstown" a story which repeats again in spite of the years and in spite of different political problem and different administrations since President Roosevelt. Despite his efforts, the Depression hung until 1941-42 when American involvement in the Second War World resulted in the drafting of young men into military service and the creation of million of jobs in the industry of defence and war.

Springsteen, himself, who was born in 1949, lived a childhood and youth haunted by a kind of darkness surrounding his town and household. The aftermath of the years of the Depression brought a grim picture of decay and darkness to many cities, states as is the case of the story of a steelworker in Youngtown. The narrator situates the reader on the setting of the story which goes back to 1803, when James and Danny Heaton found a mine of gold and built the furnaces which later were to make "

".._.the cannon balls that helped the Union win the War_ (and which later in WWII built also the tanks and bombs). Although the story begins happily, the chorus is repeating constantly that the narrator is getting more and more depressed, defeated by some reason: " _I'm sinkin'down / Here darlin' in Youngstown_ ". Later, the reader is transported to the 1960s, when the steelworker's son describes his returning from Vietnam with the purpose of having a secure job at the mill thinking that he will be able to feed a family:

\_Well my daddy worked the furnaces Kept em hotter than hell I come home from Nam worked my way to scarfer A job that'd suit the devil as well Taconite, coke and limestone Fed my children and made my pay Then smokestacks reachin"

like the arms of god Into a beautiful sky of soot and clay.\_

The comparison of smokestacks to the arms of god provides a sense of importance to the steel industry in Youngstown. These arms seem to be so powerful, so strong that they provide jobs, opportunities to people. This industry helps them to live decent lives. Later, the narrator still remembers his father coming to Ohio after coming back from WWII saying that the evilest men in the world had not destroyed the city but the wealthy and powerful American corporations did: " _Them big boys did what Hitler couldn't do._ " And once again, the chorus is repeating "I'm sinkin' down" beating strongly telling why he is feeling so depressed as another victim of economic exploitation.

Curiously, the story is repeating again in many American homes and cities, from Monongaleh Valley to the Mesabi iron range to the coal mines of Appalacchia. With the words: " Once I made you rich enough / rich enough to forget my name", the narrator feels finally hopeless in front the situation, and in spite of his effort, his dedication to his work during long years, he can not expect any recognition from the owners. He feels betrayed, turned into a useless object where neither moral nor economical compensation is going to be offered to him.

The only thing he can do is to preach to find a small place where to stay after death, he is so deceived in front so much hostility that maybe he would not find peace in Heaven but in Hell, near the furnaces where he has spent his life earning his living and doing his work so proudly. This is not just a tale about workers, bad labour conditions but it gives a clear image of the power of material things in front of human feelings where economical profit is more important than desperate human souls. The narrator does not find spiritual peace in any religious faith or prayer, but instead he invokes the devil.

With this dark portrayal of Youngstown, Springsteen is invoking Steinbeck's Okies spirits experiencing a similar situation in Oklahoma about 50 years before. Actually, the Great Depression began with the Crash of the Stock Market (1929) and at the height of the Depression (1933), incomes fell down, farm prices too, men went hungry and families were obliged to migrate to California. They were offered jobs as Tom Joad said to Timothy at Weedpatch camp: "You know, fore we lef'home, we heard they was plenty work out here.

Seen han'bills askin'folks to come out" (Grapes: 293) which was not true so that the owners had been spreading more handbills than workers needed.

Gangs of youth rode the rails in box cars like so many hobos hoping to find a job, travelling from one place to another for free via fright trains trying luck somewhere being mostly "farmhands". At the same time as Okies, hobos left the Great Plains heading for California in search of farms, fields where to work, the sector industry was also badly shaken, factories closed, and mills and mines were abandoned in other parts of the country. After president Hoover, Roosevelt was elected in 1932 and with him a New Deal Programme was established. New laws created with the aim of improving the welfare of many citizens were not applied as is the case of the Hooverville's, where meanwhile government was trying to feed and give medical assistance to the needed, banks and huge growers were sabotaging them. Weedpatch camp was one of those exceptional camps designed to help and relieve migrants where they could have sanitary units, where families never missed a meal and where everybody could work and enjoy with some balls and new clothes. There were no cops and the people living there could run themselves the camp and even organize some committees in order to share responsibilities and other community tasks, as the watchman, Mr Thomas told Tom: "No cops. We got our own cops. Folks here elect their cops."(Grapes: 286).

Million of migrants had been dispossessed of their "homesteads" after many years of working the land as their ancestors, old pioneers and even Indian tribes. But it was the bad treatment of the land ecologically and economically speaking that had caused the well-known Dust Bowls Storms which so accurately had been depicted by Steinbeck at the beginning of the Grapes:

"The air and the sky darkened and through them the sun shone redly, and there was a raw sting in the air. During the night the wind raced faster over the land, dug cunningly the rootlets of the corn, and the corn fought the wind with its weakened leaves until the rots were freed" (Grapes: 2).

The poor farmers lost everything they owned from the shanties they had built to the animals they had including the closest of their relatives who were killed or disappeared in the storms. The entire region that comprises Kansas, Colorado, Nebraska, Oklahoma and Texas was totally devastated where men could not grow anything, and land could not hold the earth and turned into dust which the wind blew away. As Donald Worster would state in his Dust Bowl, The Southern Plains in the 1930s commenting about who was to blame about the disaster in the sense that the storms did not get the blame but the machines of the new era, he says: "It is the hand of culture that selects out innate human qualities and thereby gives variety to history. It was culture in the main that created the Dust Bowl (94)". According to him, the unlimited wealth which came with the capitalism was transforming a rural economy leaving the homestead tenants without a home to live, without land to grow their own food to survive but with anger, humiliation and total uncertainty concerning their fate.

This is the grim and pessimistic vision that Steinbeck tries to give throughout The Grapes:

The cars of the migrant people crawled out of the side roads onto the great cross- country highway ...in the daylight they scuttled like bugs to the westward; and as the dark caught them, they clustered like bugs near to shelter and to water... they shared their lives, their food, and the things they hoped for in the new country

When the Joads arrive at Baskerville camp, the shelters described offer a clear image of refugee camps: " _And there was a huge tent, ragged, torn in strips and the tears mended with pieces of wire._.." (. Also the image of hunger, especially when Ma Joad tries to cook something for the family and suddenly the smell of the food makes some children come close to her: " I dunno what to do. I can't rob the fambly. I got to

"**WAITIN'ON THE GHOST OF TOM JOAD"**

_He pulls the prayer book out of his sleeping bag Preacher lights up a butt and takes a drag Waitin' for when the last shall be the first and the first shall be the last In a cardboard box neath the underpass_

"...feed the fambly...and outside they could hear the children digging into the pot with their sticks and their spoons and their pieces of rusty tin" causing her a restless feeling between her duties as bread giver of the family and her wish to help the starving children."

Springsteen, being both an artist and observer, is also depicting the life of the refugees in the 90s ironically inviting the reader to welcome "The New World Order" that H.W. Bush administration s promises which instead of leading to a series of social improvements, they turned into long queues of jobless, Mexican citizens having for only shelter their cars in the well-known Southwest highway as the Joads had. He is concerned with the frustrating migration movement of his contemporaries and also concerned with their inner, spiritual lives. He tries to show that in spite of the gap of years since The Grapes, the new government has not succeeded in offering to citizens a better world where to live decently.

If the characters in previous stories had been trapped in hopeless situations in different places of the States, now, the characters are going to go through an awakening process where their past experience, knowledge and faith in any religion is going to be questioned since there is no explanation to the injustices they have to face.

The narrator of TGOTJ mentions somebody who pulls a prayer book from his sleeping bag which reminds the figure of preacher Casy in The Grapes while he is thinking and trying to understand what is happening around him. His previous faith, his former speeches are not useful anymore, he does not know what his duties are as a preacher: "I got the spirit sometimes an' nothin' to preach about. I got the call to lead the people, an 'no place to lead them" (Grapes: 21) or when later, he says: "I figgered about the Holy Spirit...maybe it' all women we love; maybe that's the Holy Sperit-the human sperit...Maybe all men got one big soul ever'body's a part of" (Grapes: 24), words which Tom eventually comes to understand by the end of the story. Without pretending, Casy acts as Tom's spiritual mentor trying to put on words how he feels and what he thinks about the injustices suffered by their own folks. He tries to work out how can a preacher like him can still be useful to them.

Later in the novel, when Tom Joad meets under a bridge "beside a tiny stream...a man sat on a box in front of the tent" (381) which happens to be Casy, Tom begins to understand what Casy is trying to tell him about how strikes begin and how cops then come down on them:

What made em bad was they needed stuff. An' I begin to see, then. It's need that makes all the trouble...one fella started yellin', an' nothin" happened...then another ...and we al got the same tone an' I tell ya, it jus" seemed like that tank bulged an'give and swelled up. By God! Then somepin happened! (382) With the lyrics of "Straight Time", "Highway 29" and "Dry Lightning", Springsteen examines the life of people living on the fringe in these Southwest border towns. He tries to express how the characters feel, when somebody's mind is swinging in that "thin line" ready to make a choice which can be decisively in one's life.

In "**Straight Time,** Springsteen tells about the story of an ex-con who works at a rendering plant and wants to live a life on the right side of the law. He seems that the first thing he does after getting out of prison is to get married with the idea of saving his life if he tries to domesticate his wild previous life. But as an ex-con, it is difficult to choose among jobs and the one he has in the slaughterhouse does not help him much. Working among death, blood of animals: "It ain't gonna make me rich", is not going to give much sense to his life, not even a good reason to wake up every morning. He considers other options as the trade proposed by his uncle which deals with stolen cars, but once again, he faces again the criminal world which he fears: " I got a cold mind to go tripping across hat thin line / I'm sick of doing straight time" as he does not want to go back to jail.

The ex-con cannot put aside his previous life, the evil temptation of the uncle who is going to pay him better than choosing any other job, is tempting him in spite of his fear of doing "straight time". However, as he says:

Eight years in, it feels like you're gonna die But you get used to anything Sooner or later it becomes your life So he does not matter too much. He also faces the possibility of his boring married life which he compares to life in jail and he sees no real light at the end of the tunnel. His future is dark and the only option is to continue his "straight time" inside jail or outside, both ways are going to lead him to the grave. Death is there, whether it is a crime he is going to commit, or if it is his own death. The smell of it is there too. It symbolizes a life which is not worth living, where there is no hope.

We are responsible fo r our own choices, but if they turned to be irresponsible in the eyes of justice, they might grow into nightmares in a society where greed, selfish behaviour does not help to improve some tragic choices. In The Grapes, Tom had spent four years in McAlester prison for homicide in self-defence and when the story begins he has just come out of it after getting parole to keep and not being able to leave the estate. When being asked about the time spent there, he would answer: "Course you get goddamn good an' sick a-doin' the same thing day after day ...But when a bunch of men take an' lock you up four years, it ought to have some meaning...That sort of senselessness kind a worries a man" (55), which means it is difficult to forget an experience like this and also to forgive the ones who are to blame of a given crime, especially when someone is in jail for a innocent crime.

In " **Highway 29**, Springsteen always haunted by the ghost of his earlier Nebraska album, presents a character who seems to work as a shoe salesman in a store where he meets a woman which whom he establishes a short conversation and exchanges telephone numbers. He meets her later in a roadhouse and together, they rob a bank and flee down Highway 29 heading for Sierra Madre (West Mexico and Southern American States) where they finally are going to be involved in a car crash:

We headed into Sierra Madre cross the borderline The winter sun, shot through the black trees I told myself it was all something in her But as we drove I knew it was something in me Something had been comin'for a long long time And something that was here with me now On highway 29 While driving, thousand images cross the character's mind. Surrounded by a dark winter, black trees all the way, he begins to blame her companion for his deeds, then he comes to realise that he is the only one to blame for his actions and discovers the evil side inside him.

The premonition of what it is going to happen is in the air and the highway is there to help him escape from his bad choices, from himself and from the law while trying to be free. His inner battle acts as a liberating force stronger than his mind. His soul is so broken that he can only run, escape from his sins and demons although he fears death: The wind comes silent through the windshield All I could see was snow and sky and pines I closed my eyes and I was runnin' I was runnin' then I was flyin'.

A similar situation occurs when Tom Joad's uncle, John, gets drunk as the only way to escape from a sin which does not allow him to feel decent, burdening often the family. He is wondering about Casy's words: "a fella's sinned if he thinks he's sinned" (267) which brings more problems to his conscience.

"**Dry Lightning** is about a recent and strong experience which is still in the mind of the narrator while he is staring at the horizon where flashes of lightning are crossing the desert. Sweet memories of a lover, maybe, come to him in the shape of an appaloosa as a rare and attractive breed riding in Western regions of America. Under a halo effect of dark skin under the white coat next to the spots, the appaloosa appears as strong and powerful figure with flashes of "dry lightning" crossing the sky, and the narrator first memories of a well-built dancer who enchanted him fill his mind. He also recalls some fighting of an unsuccessful relationship with a dancer he met in Alvarado Street (Los Angeles) in which passion had been hard, violent but also devastating as dry storms in the area can be: "Is dry lightning on the horizon line / Just dry lightning and you on my mind". Relationships are difficult and memories can be bitter and also sweet, but they quickly belong to one's past although they help us to move forward or even prevent us from doing anything. As is the case of bad memories, hope is the only help and it can only be found in oneself: "ain't nobody gonna give nobody / What they really need anyway".

In The Grapes, when the Joads had to leave their home and all their belongings, they were asking themselves: " How can we live without our lives?

How will we know it's us without our past? No. Leave it. Burn it...How if you wake up in the night and know- the willow tree's not there? Can you live without the willow tree? Well, no, you can't. The willow tree is you." (Grapes: 89)

The "willow tree" as a symbol of a whole life plenty of good and bad memories together with the bitterness of losing everything was provoking a dreadful pain to the family, which made them load the car quickly and drove away as anybody else would help them.

In "**My Best was Never Good Enough**, the character seems to apologize for his lack of ability with his personal relationships. Springsteen uses a number of popular sayings to help the character overcome his difficulties with "the other" while trying to tell him how to behave and how to focus life differently like when in the "The Ghost of Tom Joad" one of the verse sings: " Waitin' for when the last shall be first and the first shall be last".

Patience, acceptance of one's fate and appreciation of simple details seem to be really advisable as well as the daily effort and willingness of working hard to get the most out of you and out of the others. There is also a kind of redemption through which one person can feel spiritually rewarded and useful to others. The changeability of life and the fact that everyone has its opportunities to change, to adapt, and to "take the ride" as Springsteen himself would say: "knowing you could lose didn't mean you didn't still take the ride. In fact, it made taking the ride all the more important" (Alterman: 265). All these suggestions or advice seem to be behind this story in order to help the character to overcome and to adapt to his situation.

In The Grapes, The Joads take also the ride when their consciousness is awakening, : " This you may say of man...having stepped forward, he may slip back, but only a step, never the full step back" (Grapes: 150) through the novel, they are learning to change, to adapt to the new conditions, that is the only way they can survive as when they take "their step forward" and begin to realise they are not the only ones

_Got a one-ticket to the Promised Land You got a hole in your belly and a gun in your hand Sleeping on a pillow of solid rock Bathin' in the city aqueduct_

immerse in this situation but thousands more, so they come to understand that they need to behave differently, they need to cooperate to survive: "The two men squatting in a ditch, the little fire, the side-meat in a single-pot, the silent, stone-eyed women...the baby has a cold. Here, take thus blanket. It's wool...This is the beginning from "I" to "we".

The words "a hole in your belly and a gun in your hand" from this stanza of "The Ghost of Tom Joad" bring us to another song of the album called **"The New Timer.**

In it, Springsteen tours us to another part of the country which was well known by Steinbeck. The narrator, a labourer with a boxcar hobo credentials dating back to the Depression, having left the Northeast, travels to America countryside looking for work. The story is again very similar to the one in "The Ghost of Tom Joad" where the narrator meets Frank, who becomes a mentor for him. They travel from East Texas to New Mexico, to Colorado and California, hoeing sugar beets and picking peaches as the lyrics says. The narrator remembers Frank's advice: "you don't cross nobody / you'll be all right here kid", meaning that it is better to follow the rules, to accept conditions, to be careful with what you say when being in the American side, but the following summer Frank is found dead in Stockton (California). Like Casy in The Grapes, he was a victim of a motiveless crime: "That shiny bastard. That's him... Casy stared blindly at the light. He breathed heavily.

"Listen", he said. "You fellas don' know what you're doin'. You're helpin' to starve kids.

The narrator also tells about the bad treatment they received concerning their working experience: "They bunked us in a barn just like animals / me and a hundred others just like me", similar image to that of The Grapes: "We tried to camp together, an' they druv us like pigs. Scattered us. Beat the hell outa fellas" . Eventually, the New Timer's character will lament about his loneliness and the family he has left behind. He will be alone, without job, in a hostile world where he will try to survive with a "machete" and at the mercy of Jesus. In fact, this was how the "ticket to the promised land" put an end to this story.

In other stories such as "**Across the Border**, Springsteen makes us travel to the "mythical promised land" where the character tries to fulfil his dream and be in peace with him, physically or metaphysically speaking. The geographic "border" that the Bravo waters form from south western Colorado State to the Gulf of Mexico has much broader connotations than the mere physical ones. The narrator sings that he has packed his bag; he seems ready to cross a border which will lead him to his love. They will be reunited; they will sleep in the open sky in each other's arms. As he keeps saying, all the pains and sadness they have met in this world will disappear as soon as they "drink from the Bravo's muddy waters / where the sky grows grey and white", but the waters are "muddy" and the sky is not blue, so maybe the new life will not be so idyllic as he wishes. In spite of some darkness, the character has the dream of building a home on a grassy hill where:

_Sweet blossoms fill the air Pastures of gold and green Roll down into cool clear waters_

Waiting for the time when he finally will reach that instant of bliss. The moment is so perfect, that it becomes difficult to think that this paradise will be found in earth but maybe in Heaven. He keeps being strong, having faith:

For what are we Without hope in our hearts That someday we'll drink God's blessed waters And eat the fruit from the vine However, this physical border could be referring to another boundary which all human have to face, the one between life and death: Tonight we'll sing the songs And tomorrow my heart will be strong And may the saints' blessing and grace Carry me safely into your arms

With this story, Springsteen brings us back to the Joads when they were coming closer to California, "the promised land" which was to fulfil their dreams and expectations: "suddenly they saw the great valley below them...The vineyards, the orchards, the great flat valley, green and beautiful, the trees set in rows, and the farm houses. And Pa said, "God Almighty!" The distant cities, the little towns in the orchard land, and the morning sun, golden on the valley" (227).

This was Grandpa's only dream about California: "Jus' let me get out to California where I can pick me an orange when I want it. Or grapes. There's a thing I ain't never had enough of. Gonna get me a whole big bunch a grapes off a bush, or whatever, an' I'm gonna squash'em on my face an' let'em run offen my chin."

In fact, the Joads felt very proud about their status of "homesteaders" as it gave them the sense of property of the land as when Tom, after leaving the prison and coming closer to his house pointed to the boundary fence: " That there's our line. We didn't really need no fence there, but we had the wire, an' Pa kinda liked her there. Said it give him a feelin' that forty was forty". As tenants, this was their land. They were born there, they had worked there, and they even "had to kill the Indians and drive them away..." .

According to them this made ownership, not a paper with numbers.

But if at that time the monster was represented by the bank which they could not control, being forced to get off the land, it seems that after a time, roles had got upside down in the sense that in earlier generations the "monster" could have been the first colonizers, the pioneers, even Grandpa, all of them driven by the greed of land.

When Pa Joad realises that he cannot work his land since his individual labour is not anymore useful, his dream crushes. "The myth of the frontier" which means going west, starting anew, forgetting about past which is present in many of the tenants like Pa Joad vanishes. However as Louis Owen would say: This Garden is inhabited by flawed men, men who, like Tom with his scar at the novel's end, are marked. The Eden - and Canaan-like valley that spreads so wonderfully beneath the Joads will prove to be filled with hatred, violence, greed, and corruption- the fruits of man's wisdom and knowledge lying rotting in the fields and orchards. It is a heavily ironic promise into the Promised Land (Bloom: 70)

**"WITH THE GHOST OF OLD TOM JOAD"**

_Now Tom said " Mom, wherever there's a cop beatin' a guy Wherever a hungry newborn baby cries Where there's a fight gainst the blood and hatred in the air Look for me Mom I'll be there Wherever there's somebody fightin' for a place to stand Or a decent job or a helpin' hand Wherever somebody's strugglin' to be free Look in their eyes Mom you'll see me_

On one way or another, this is what many of Springsteen's characters experience about their own American Dream.

Finally with "The Ghost of Tom Joad's words "bathin' in the city aqueduct", the Joads and the Wilsons from The Grapes come to our mind again when they stop at Needles for getting water. Finally, they have a bath in the river: "They lay in the water and looked across at the sharp peaks called Needles, and the white rock mountains of Arizona" (203) where water helped them relieved themselves physically and also spiritually. This is when Noah expresses that he likes to stay there forever and in fact he will leave the family. At the same time, Tom begins to have the premonition that "This here's a murder country. This here's the bones of a country. Wonder if we'll ever get in a place where folks can live thout fightin' hard scrabble an'rocks" . The water acts as a symbol of renewal and also as a symbol of conversion to a new faith or a change into a new situation as it happens with the character of Bravo waters in "Across the River' song.

At the end of Springsteen's "The Ghost of Tom Joad", it seems that the narrator is trying to reproduce Steinbeck's Tom Joad's last words with his mother before taking the ride of his own life at the end of the novel.

Eventually Tom's consciousness is awakening and he has been fully aware of Casy's words since the day they met after Tom left McAlester's jail while going home. Now, Tom knows how put Casy's words in action and he promises his mother to be true to himself, to the land and to his breed while fighting and helping the others.

With his words "I'll be there", he means he is going to be present, he will fight to defend anybody who is involved in a fight or in any bloody situation like it is the case with the character in "**Balboa Park**, where prostitution, corruption is present during the story. He also "will be there" in "Galveston Bay" where the two main characters are surrounded by "hatred in the air" and where a story about racism and revenge takes place. He will be present "wherever there's somebody fighting for a place to stand" or where he would be needed to help to find a decent job as is the case of the character in "Sinaloa Cowboys.

"**Sinaloa Cowboys** lyric chronicles the lives of two Mexican brothers, Miguel and Louis, who crossed the border into California and began working in the orchards of San Joaquin Valley. They left their families and homes; they headed north working all day long doing jobs that others would not do. One day, they heard from some Sinaloa men (Mexico) that some workers were needed in Fresno County (California) in "a deserted chicken ranch" cooking methamphetamine. In spite of the physical danger involved in the job: _ If you slipped the hydriodic acid Could burn right through your skin They've leave you spittin' up blood in the desert If you breathed those fumes in_

The brothers chose this illegal job as they could make quicker money than working in the orchards. By the end of the story, Louis has an accident when the kitchen explodes. Miguel carries his young brother "To the creekside and there in the tall grass, Louis Rosales died ", then, Miguel droves him to a grove where they had buried the money they had saved. Miguel digs up the ten thousand dollars and buries his brother in the grave, act which symbolizes the exchange of money for life. At that moment, he recalls his father's words mentioned at the beginning of the song: "My sons one thing you will learn / for everything the north gives, it exacts a price in return". Louis is another casualty of drugs, another story that can be found in many inner-cities which are characterized by urban-decay. Drug-dealers could be the ones to blame for the death of Louis but maybe the truth is that "others" could be the responsible of his death.

This is the cost of living in the promised land of the New West as the father had well experienced along the years working in industrialized areas which do not give anything for free and where working conditions are not easy, not even decent. More often than not, the use of these working conditions are degrading as is the case in The Grapes when the son of Joe Davis's boy prefers to take a job in which he is going to earn enough to feed his family in spite of being morally corrupted against his people as the tenant said to him: "But for you three dollars a day fifteen or twenty families can't eat at all. Nearly a hundred people have to go out and wander on the roads" . His greed and individualistic behaviour did not allow him help the others, choosing to follow the orders from the East and "crushing the house like a bug". This is what the power of money can do in some situations where human beings turn into cold machines.

There is also another scene in which the family is trying to bury Grandpa but as they cannot pay for a funeral they are discussing the best way of burying him just not to have problems with the law: "The gov'ment's got more interest in a dead man than in a live one. They ll go hell-scrapin' tryin' to fin'out who he was and how he died" to what Casy responded with a comforting prayer, telling them that the poor man has lived his life and the rest of the family had to go ahead even if he had to be buried like a pauper. Again, the power of money dividing social classes even when dying.

"**Balboa Park's** lyrics tells about the story of a teenager boy and other friends who deal with drugs and get involved in a bad game between drug dealers "in their Mercedes" and the patrol borders. Sure the boys have met doing the same dehumanizing job somewhere. The boy in the lyrics, Spider, hears the border patrol near the bridge and begins running down the highway.

During the raid, he gets hit by the car and nobody stops to help him. He is too invisible to the eyes of authorities and other citizens who maybe use this road to commute to his peaceful suburban areas from their work. The character takes shelter in an underpass where he lies among the filth, waiting for his death. This is the side of America cities nobody mentions. The main topic of the lyric deals with the cost of living in the Promised Land among drug dealers. Little Spider and the other hustlers X-man and Cochise smuggle cocaine from Mexico: "they come north to California / end up with the poison in their blood" as the narrator says. Maybe they have made the choice of earning fast money; maybe they have been forced to accept this job as they have to send money to their families apart from the earnings to subsist including their own intake of inhalants like the "toncho" mentioned in the song. Never mind if the work is a degrading one which means risking their lives everyday: "He did what he had to do for the money / sometimes he sent home what he could spare". More often than not poverty and powerlessness go together and as a consequence these people are excluded from society. In addition, their skin colour, their roots and their language help them to be easily trapped under these fatal circumstances.

Some other times, Springsteen's stories tell about right choices although they involve prejudices, internal fights when the character is hesitating about his deep values as is the case in "**Galveston Bay.** In it, Le Bin Son, a Vietnamese immigrant decides to come to America after having "fought side by side with the Americans". He left Saigon and brought his family to the Promised Land and settle down in the Gulf of Mexico, a place which "reminded him of home". He worked hard as a machinist, saved money to buy a "shrimp boat with his cousin / And together they harvested Galveston Bay. The other important character is Billy Sutter, an American who fought in Vietnam too.

After being wounded, he shipped home in '68 and he married, had a family and made his living fishing in the gulf. As more refugees came, Billy, the veteran together with other native-born Americans began to be resentful as they "settle on the same streets and worked the coast they grew up on". Soon in many locals it was heard "America for the Americans / Someone said, "You want em out, you got to burn em out" and the Ku Klux Klan invaded the place with racist feelings. After a trial, he could leave the court, but Billy said "My friend, you're a dead man" wanting to revenge the death of one of his friends.

One night, Billy had the opportunity to commit the crime, but he finally forgave him, or at least he tried to turn away from his devils:

_Le lit a cigarette, the bay was as still as glass As he walked by Billy stuck his knife into his pocket Took a breath and let him pass_

Billy seemed to have understood and accepted what Le Bing had done. Both had been fighting for the same cause in Vietnam, later, life had brought them to America with the aim of living a decent and peaceful life with their families : "And casts his net into the water" is a verse which is used three times along the song giving sense to this wish. In fact with "every wish it comes a curse" as Springsteen would say in some lyrics. Maybe here both character's wish was thrown there, into the waters, trying to find what they need to feed their families and their own souls. However there was something in this multicultural world that filled Billy with prejudices of race, an anger towards the situation but in fact, in Vietnam, Billy could have been the vulnerable one, not the stronger among Le's people.

_The highway is alive tonight But nobody's kiddin' nobody about where it goes I'm sittin' downhere in the campfire light With the ghost of old Tom Joad_

For the vast majority of Springsteen's characters, the American dream has turned into an empty one like the okies. Ironically, California which stood for the Promised Land with beautiful springs, green fields plenty of trees in blossom ready to fulfil the dreams of migrants who desperately needed to pick up some fruit to survive, were forced to see and suffer more humiliations: "Carloads of oranges dumped on the ground. The people came for miles to take the fruit, but this could not be...they had to be destroyed to keep up prices" while they were dying of hunger. The image of degrading labor conditions at that time began to be voiced by some of the characters, and Casy was the one acting like a leader.

After leaving Weedpatch Camp, the Joads found themselves in an overcrowded "highway" heading north in search of a new field where to work. Crossing such a rich country, they were overwhelmed by a feeling of happiness dreaming once more about picking up plenty of peaches, grapes and having a small house, but all of a sudden, these dreams fade away at Hooper Ranch: " in the eyes of people there is the failure; and in the eyes of the hungry there is a growing wrath. In the souls of people the grapes of wrath are filling and growing heavy, growing heavy for the vintage" (349). Lies, speculation, prices slowing down and starvation among other injustices filled the souls of people with wrath. This is what Casy tried to tell Tom when they met under the bridge near the highway: "It's need that makes all the trouble...one fella yellin', an'nothin' happened...then another ...Then somethin'happened!They come a- runnin', and they give us some other stuff to eat" (382). After Casy's experience in jail talking, listening and observing other fellows, he came to realise that they had to tell the others what was happening. Casy's former religious speeches had turned into workers prayers to help them realise that they had to be together and yell for their rights. After Casy's death, Tom cannot stop thinking about Casy's words: "a wilderness ain't no good, cause his little piece of a soul wasn't no good less it was with the rest" after what Tom decides that although human beings are normally alone, their soul can be shared in order to reach the same objectives.

In chapter 28, while the family is working as cotton pickers and is living in boxcars sharing what they have with the neighbours, Tom has to hide after having taken revenge on Casy's death. He is badly injured and although it is going to be difficult for him to escape from the estate, he has to take a decision and leave the family. He tries to sooth the farewell with his mother, giving her hope since maybe they are not going to be able to see each other anymore physically, but reassuring her that his spirit will always be near her:

I'll be ever'where-wherever you look. Wherever they's fight so hungry people can eat, I'll be there. Wherever they's a cop beatin' up a guy, I'll be there.

If Casy knowed, why, I'll be in the way guys yell when they're mad an'-I'll be in the way kids laugh when they're hungry an' they know supper's ready. An"

when our folks eat the stuff they raised an' live in the houses they build- why, I'll be there. See? God, I'm talkin' like Casy. Comes of thinkin' about him so much. Seems like I can see him sometimes.

With these words, Tom Joad is taking the ride like Casy did before him, and others have done during their lives. Since old times troubadours, song-writers and writers have told their folks about the experiences of many fictional and non-fictional characters and through their short or long narratives, real or allegorical stories have been there informing "the others. If their works had not been transmitted, present generations would not have known about their past and perhaps and human evolution would have been different.

Steinbeck's Tom Joad was immortalised in the story of The Grapes of Wrath and as he has grown old, Springsteen has invoked " his ghost" to give voice to the thousands of invisible people that nowadays are suffering the same injustices as Tom Joad and others who have long time ago disappeared. Along these last lyrics, "the ghost of old Tom Joad" has been already there witnessing different deaths through the stories of Balboa Park ,Sinaloa Cowboys and Galveston Bay where the characters have been involved in the decay, darkness and emptiness of a modern America. They have been exploited in their jobs, and they have faced emotional struggles when trying to accept the ethnic "other.

**CONCLUSION**

As this dissertation has tried to argue, Springsteen's The Ghost of Tom Joad can be understood as a close adaptation of Steinbeck's The Grapes of Wrath, now cast in the genre of folk music. Whether the main purpose of Springsteen was actually to adapt the novel or to use it as a source of inspiration to tell about the suffering of American people basically invisible to the eyes of society is not relevant here. However, we can claim that the use of a fictional character such as Tom Joad is an effective use of the literary original in order to speak about what was going on in America in the 1990s.

My point here is not analyze the specific circumstances that brought Springsteen to read from Steinbeck or other authors to fulfil his projects while creating and writing his lyrics; but what it is certain is that Tom Joad helped Springsteen to give voice to his message. With the release of this album in 1995, Springsteen helped to resurrect Steinbeck's character as one who was witness to all the injustices and suffering of a sector of his contemporary American society and to a certain extent, to society in general.

As mentioned in the introduction, "the land" and mainly "the greed for the land" brought many immigrants to America with the desire of getting a decent job and a home where they could fulfil their dreams. If, during a certain period of time, America stood for the Promised Land, where opportunities for getting land were many, through the years this dream has become a nightmare.

Springsteen's vision of justice and fairness has also transformed over the years, and at some points in his life he has tried to express his concerns and tell people about struggles and injustices by helping the voiceless. He has wanted to make his audiences "reflect" on human behaviour, and the loss of values of this society. Even though he had tried to do this in previous albums, it was The Ghost of Tom Joad that turned out to be his most intimate and convincing album in this particular ambit. With his harsh voice and simple accompaniment, he was giving a direct, uncomplicated and accessible voice to the anxieties of many people (as well as to his own worries), just as Steinbeck did in the 30s with his novel.

Audiences are free to interpret his lyrics in many ways, but whenever Springsteen composes, he appears to have a particular project in mind. His lyrics give response to a variety of events which, as well as reflecting his personal "journey", may also affect the experience of a whole community or even his own experience. Through his career, lyrics to songs such as "The River, "My City in Ruins", "The Last Carnival or "This Land is your Land" have been used to speak about life, to give support to a given cause, to pay tribute to a friend (to mention only a few examples). But what is certain is that Springsteen always offers the message of "faith and hope" to overcome any spiritual or physical loss. In recent albums he has gone back to old folk songs, he travels back to earlier times, invoking the pioneering "American spirit" present in song-writers such as Woody Guthrie and Pete Seeger, as well as in writers such as Steinbeck.

With The Ghost of Tom Joad, Springsteen paid tribute to Steinbeck's Grapes by allowing people to know more about this work and the novelist's vision of America in earlier decades. Springsteen's concerns are the same as Steinbeck's and both men have, in effect, played the role of Tom Joad throughout their careers. My aim here has been to analyse how Springsteen's characters evolve into a socially conscious characters during the course of their stories and how their suffering develops into a focus for exposing injustice, exactly in the same way as Steinbeck's characters did. In that sense, the whole album seems to be a legacy of Steinbeck's vision, warning his society about the consequences of the disappearance of human values in the face of a cold and materialistic society. Steinbeck's fears were that the uprooting and alienation of society was destroying the soul of America; my reading of Springsteen's lyrics would seem to confirm this fear, as expressed through the characters that reveal the injustices of their world or, in contrast, struggle to keep up their small moments of dignity. Perhaps we now no longer need to search any further for the ghost of Tom Joad: in the narrative folk songs of Bruce Springsteen's music, he is already with us.
