---
title: "Federici's, WindMill hold special spots on Bruce's plate"
author: "Chris Jordan"
source: "Asbury Park Press"
date: "2014-12-17"
category: "Commentary"
---

New Jersey singers like to eat.

Frank Sinatra had Patsy's Restaurant in New York City, Whitney Houston had a table at the Black Horse Tavern in Mendham and Jon Bon Jovi has the Soul Kitchen in Red Bank.

But Bruce Springsteen, well, he's not really known for a single place. If he did, we wouldn't report it as to protect his privacy. But there are several spots at the Jersey Shore where he's a known regular —- even if that's once or twice a year — so if you want to eat like a Boss, you can.

Take the original WindMill restaurant, famous for its hot dogs, in the West End section of Long Branch. It's about a block down the road from the bungalow where Springsteen wrote much of "Born to Run", and he's been hitting the spot for the last 40 years or so.

"One of the first stops when they used to go out on tour was a stop at the WindMill", said WindMill co-owner Rena Levine-Levy. "They'd take the food out on the road with them."

The Boss has been coming back ever since, usually for a late-night snack after a performance in Asbury Park. The WindMill folks have previously catered Springsteen holiday shows at Convention Hall in Asbury Park.

One night, the crew kept the place open for Springsteen, who enjoys both the WindMill hot dogs and hamburgers, Levine-Levy said. He was sitting at the counter when there was a banging on the window.

Springsteen and the guys turned around to see a woman flash the Boss.

"It's 3:30 a.m. in Long Branch", Springsteen said. "I'm going home."

Another time the Boss' wife, Patti Scialfa, went behind the counter and flipped the hot dogs herself, Levine-Levy said.

"Nobody bothers Bruce when he comes to the WindMill", Levine-Levy said. "We have an unspoken law, nobody bothers him and nobody gawks at him. He just wants to be another WindMill customer, and we're very protective of him.

Burgers or hot dogs?

Which leads us to another question — does Bruce Springsteen prefer hot dogs or hamburgers? Hannah Summers, the author of the London-based Burgers and Bruce blog at [www.burgersandbruce.com](http://www.burgersandbruce.com/), has some insight into the matter.

"He said he likes hamburgers, and he likes them simple with ketchup", Summers said. "He said he likes them simple, '50s and '60s diner style. Nothing too fancy or too glamorous."

Springsteen is partial to the Johnny Rockets chain, Summers said.

Summers did not ask the Boss about hot dogs when she met him in Belfast. It is a Bruce and burgers blog, after all.

Health food?

Which brings us the question: how healthy does Springsteen eat? This topic was explored in the 2012 biography, "Bruce", by Peter Ames Carlin.

An interview with ex-girlfriend Diane Lozito is telling.

"(Springsteen) had a hard time sleeping at night, so I'd sit up watching TV with him while he wolfed down all this junk food: sodas, cakes, all this horrible stuff", Lozito said.

His eating habits changed in the late '70s, according to Carlin, when Springsteen hired fan Obie Dziedzic to be his Gal Friday. She straightened things out by adding vegetables, salads and more to his diet. In the '80s, the Boss buffed himself up with a weightlifting regimen, which wouldn't have been successful without a solid dietary foundation. These days, he appears to be the healthiest 65-year old around who doesn't blink after three hours into a high-energy concert.

A leaked copy of his rider from the 2002 Rising tour shows Springsteen eating whey powder, soy milk, protein shakes and bananas, strawberries and blueberries backstage at his shows.

"He's in better shape than the majority of 65-year olds — although he's also in better shape than me and I'm 27", Summers said. "General fitness is obviously important or you wouldn't have the stamina for concerts like that!"

Down the Shore

He's been on the road for the better part of the last 10 years. When he's home at the Shore, he visits Federici's Restaurant on East Main Street in Freehold about once a year. It's a Springsteen family tradition as Springsteen's dad, Douglas Springsteen, was an acquaintance of Frank "Spat" Federici, said son Michael Federici.

By the way, the Freehold Federici's are not related to the late E Street Band member Danny Federici, who was from Flemington.

"My dad always remembered (Springsteen) carrying his guitar through town"Federici said.

The Boss cashed his first check at Federici's, Federici said.

"My dad dispensed the money, and he got a pizza", he said.

These days, Springsteen gets a plain pie and maybe a beer or a shot of tequila when he goes to Federici's. When he played a benefit concert at the borough's Saint Rose of Lima School in 1996, he brought more than 30 people to the restaurant.

"That was a nice honor for us", Federici said.

Dessert is often at Jersey Freeze on Manalapan Avenue and Route 9 in Freehold.

"I liked the cones", said Springsteen from the stage at MetLife Stadium in 2012. "They'd save the broken cones for me."

Chris Jordan: 732-643- 4060; [cjordan@app.com](mailto:cjordan@app.com)

Boss eats at the Jersey Shore

WindMill Restaurant: 586 Ocean Blvd., West End section of Long Branch.

732-229-9863; [www.windmillhotdogs.com](http://www.windmillhotdogs.com/)"
