---
title: "Springsteen Gets Bold Yet He Struggled For The Right Balance In His Material"
author: "Steve Morse"
source: "Boston Globe"
date: "2002-08-07"
category: "Concert Review"
---

EAST RUTHERFORD, N.J. - Bruce Springsteen shocked the faithful last night. He tilted his show so heavily toward his new album that exactly half the set - 11 of 22 songs - was drawn from it. When was the last time you heard an artist do that, especially a superstar with a 30-year back catalog?

Springsteen is undeniably proud of his new album, "The Rising", which was strongly influenced by the events of Sept. 11. And he put a lot of thought into last night's 2-hour-20-minute set (short by Springsteen standards). Yet he struggled to balance the seriousness of the new material with the more hedonistic, house-party standards woven into a night witnessed by a sold-out crowd of 20,000 fans at this tour debut at the Continental Airlines Arena.

Springsteen put considerable thought into some of the ingenious segues - new song "Lonesome Day" into archival hit "Prove It All Night" and new tune "The Fuse" into the ultimate fan favorite, "Darkness on the Edge of Town." But only once did he play more than two old songs in a row. That came near the end with an exultant "Born To Run", "Thunder Road", and Glory Days" trilogy, which let the crowd up for air.

A specific example of his difficulty in balancing the extremes of this set came when he launched into two of the most acutely painful new songs, "Empty Sky", (which alludes to the absence of the World Trade Center towers) and "You're Missing", about the death of a loved one in the 9/11 tragedy. "We're going to have a good time, but we need you to be real quiet for the next couple of songs", he said. But sensing the crowd's discomfort, he then talked of how "I took that last calming (urination) before I came out." The shtick was kind of funny, but awkward.

The show started with the title track "The Rising", an anthem yearning for salvation and beautifully played by the E Street Band, which for this tour is augmented by violinist Soozie Tyrell, who also plays a key role on the album.

And give Springsteen credit for the way some of the new songs were reworked from their studio versions. "Empty Sky", for instance, became a sparse folk song featuring just Springsteen and his wife/backup singer, Patti Scialfa.

Also, the new qawwali song, "Worlds Apart", found Springsteen wailing over a Middle Eastern vocal sample, before guitarist Steve Van Zandt added a stunning, Pink Floyd-like coda.

The constancy of the new tunes, however, suggested that Springsteen was trying too hard to force-feed them to the public, as though he were asking them to "take their medicine", as one fan remarked privately. It was a kind of paternalistic, preacher role that made you queasy at times.

Some of the weaker new songs - the gooey "Waitin' on a Sunny Day" and "Countin' on a Miracle" - didn't add anything. But another new song, the Phil Spector-ish "Mary's Place", was Bruce-a-fied with an extended house-party jam in a "Jersey Shore style" that made it much more appealing than the lighter version on the album.

Springsteen's choice of catalog tunes (especially later in the show) was likewise inviting, notably "Promised Land", "Badlands", and a seismic "Born in the USA", with the E Street Band pumping in vintage fashion.

There was no erosion of skill (and saxophonist Clarence Clemons looked a bit trimmer and more energetic than last time), but it was just a question of what Springsteen asked them to play.

One also has to wonder how this set will evolve. Because the band is doing only one show per city this tour (the multiple-date engagements will come during a return swing next year), it's likely that the set list will probably be more rigid than when Springsteen mixed it up last time. But, right now, he has to do some fine- tuning before he achieves a balance that works better than last night's debut.
