---
title: "Springsteen's Odyssey"
author: "Robert Christgau"
source: "Boston Globe"
date: "1984-09-05"
category: "Commentary"
---

If you're much over 30, you probably haven't thought much about Bruce Springsteen since he burst out of rock-and-roll nowhere onto the covers of Time and Newsweek in October 1975. And even if Springsteen made a fan of you then, it's quite possible you've lost interest since - people often do stop following pop music as their lives settle in. Springsteen has never been a staple of hit radio - not until this year did any of his singles make top 10.

Nor has he ingratiated the kind of cultural arbiters who regard seriousness as acting in movies like David Bowie or writing poetry like Patti Smith and define clout as going trentuple platinum like Michael Jackson or consorting with the powerful like Linda Ronstadt. Touring hard and laboring endlessly in the studio, Springsteen has simply pursued his craft. He's a compassionate man, and if you don't care about rock and roll he probably still cares about you. He's just not sure how to put it.

Even in the pop world Springsteen is often taken for granted. Though stuck with the tagline "rock-and-roll future", he's always been an upholder of rock- and-roll tradition, a tradition the rhythms and attitudes of punk and disco were attacking even as he made his breakthrough. Soon those subcultures were shaping the music's future, which meant that pop fans with a taste for change were largely unaware that he'd grown at all. So though Springsteen's career got plenty of help from industry tastemakers (especially FM radio programmers, whose vocation he sometimes seemed to justify single-handed in this rock- schlock era), he had to develop his audience without much help from the trend- setters within.

But at his own stubborn pace, Springsteen was evolving. Always a powerful singer and prodigious lyricist as well as a vivid performer, he honed away aural murk and beautiful-loser melodrama until his songs were compact vignettes with as complex a message about growing up and older in America as any film or fiction you care to name. And gradually he was also building up his audience, not just numerically but spiritually. Unlike such talented competitors for the rock mainstream as Billy Joel and John Cougar Mellencamp, he refused to pander. Not only did he always tell what truth he saw, but he never whined about it, and the physical ebullience where he found the traditional rock-and-roll release never devolved into the mindless self- infatuation of the traditional rock-and-roll escape. No longer naive enough to believe that being born to run ever gets you far enough, he continued to live in South Jersey and root his writing in the small victories and large compromises of the ordinary Joes and Janies he'd known all his life. These people weren't classy or influential, but he believed that their need to understand as well as celebrate was as restless as his own, and this respect got results: though he released only two albums in the five years following his 1975 breakthrough, his million-strong audience grew up and older with him, and their intense loyalty was legendary.

Yet with his dreams spread out before him, Springsteen suffered a crisis, not just because dreams fulfilled hold their own perils, but because he'd stayed close enough to home to see how far from their dreams most of his fans were destined to remain. His response was 1982's cathartic "Nebraska", a tellingly joyless album about failure and worse, recorded almost unaccompanied in his living room. FM radio hardly touched it, but more than half a million record buyers rejected the programmers' escapism, and in 1984 they got the payback: "Born in the U.S.A.", Springsteen's most rhythmically propulsive, vocally incisive, lyrically balanced, and commercially undeniable album. The tone is still bitter. The protagonist of the first No. 1 single of Springsteen's career "ain't getting nowhere living in a dump like this", and the artist's funniest male-bonding song in a decade ends ominously, with a buddy "handcuffed to the bumper of a state trooper's Ford." Bitterer still are these lines from the keynote track: "Had a brother in Khe Sanh/Fighting off the Viet Cong/They're still there, he's all gone." Somehow, though, the pessimism never seems defeated or corrosive. It isn't just his music that enables him to act out his resistance to the bad news he brings, but a faith renewed by fans who've proven themselves ready to hear him out.

Rock and roll is hardly a limitless form, and Springsteen at his toughest does list toward a certain straight-from-the-heart emotionalism. He's too white and too male, although he's decent enough to wish he weren't; he's too fatalistic and too unanalytic, although his eye is sharp as can be. But even before this rock- schlock era it was the rare superstar who could make so much of the music's potential for give-and-take with fans who are always less settled in than cynics believe. Those fans have grown older without forgetting the meaning of their dreams, and even if you're well over 30 both they and their spokesman have something to say to you, if you know how to take it.

Robert Christgau is a senior editor of the Village Voice.
