---
title: "Springsteen As A Political Force"
author: "Steve Morse"
source: "Boston Globe"
date: "1985-01-25"
category: "Commentary"
---

Bruce Springsteen has become the most politically powerful rock 'n' roll singer since John Lennon. That was the impression that lingered the most after his two blood-boiling shows at the Providence Civic Center this week.

Numerous times Springsteen introduced his songs with harsh attacks on social injustices. He also put his money where his mouth is by donating $10,000 to the Rhode Island Community Food Bank, which helps the unemployed, the elderly and the destitute. As he said: "The trickle-down theory of economics ain't trickling down to all of us. And if the government doesn't do something about it, the people got to."

In a brief interview after Wednesday's show, his guitarist, Nils Lofgren, was asked about Springsteen's heightened interest in social issues. "He knows he now has a forum for his views, and he's using it", Lofgren said. "What he's doing is obviously to put it right in your face, but he's really trying to do good things for people. He really means it."

It was also learned Springsteen and his E Street Band will perform a benefit for Ethiopian famine relief next month in Los Angeles with Lionel Richie. It will be his first benefit since appearing at nuclear disarmamantrallies several years ago.

"Find something you can believe in and hold on to it", Springsteen said at Wednesday's show. And as he noted in a street- wise acknowledgment of keyboardist Danny Federici's birthday: "It don't matter how old you get, you got to keep searching for that promised land."
