---
title: "Springsteen Stands Alone The Songwriter Talks About His Message"
author: "Steve Morse"
source: "Boston Globe"
date: "1996-09-13"
category: "Commentary"
---

Have folk guitar, will travel.

That's Bruce Springsteen's job description this year. Like a modern-day Woody Guthrie, he has kept his promise to bring his solo acoustic show -- filled with working-class message songs -- to the highways of the world.

"Get your acoustic guitar and you can go anywhere", Springsteen said. "It's so freeing."

Springsteen just finished a tour of Europe to support his stark, social- protest disc, "The Ghost of Tom Joad", and is about to start a new round of US dates. To symbolize his populist stance, many of the shows will occur outside big cities, such as Thursday's stop at the Providence Performing Arts Center and a Nov. 14 visit to Lowell Memorial Auditorium. (Both shows are sold out.) Springsteen also now realizes he's "outside" the mainstream of today's music scene. That's quite an admission from an artist who defined the mainstream back in the '80s when he and the E Street Band sold 12 million copies of "Born in the U.S.A."

By contrast, his latest album, featuring story songs about hard-luck Americans and immigrants, has done well in Europe, but not in the United States, where radio programmers have given it a cool reception.

"At this point in my life, I see the {US} music scene and the music business as relatively inhospitable", Springsteen said during a Boston interview with this writer (and Bill Flanagan of VH1) on the first leg of the tour.

"But I feel a greater sense of purpose now. I have a greater idea of what my job is, who I am and what I want to do not just this year but in the future -- and it's pretty much outside the general thrust of the music business. But that's OK.

"With this particular show, I just really felt at home again in some strange way. Yet, at the same time, the show is fundamentally rooted in the present.

It doesn't trade off my past in any major way. It's completely non-nostalgic.

It's not based on 'Glory Days' or whatever you want to call it."

The "Tom Joad" album happened organically -- and somewhat by accident.

"I actually made two records. When I went to do this material, I had a small live band with Danny Federici and Gary Tallent {two E Street members} and Gary Malabar and Marty Rifkin on steel guitar. And it was a mixture of things that went from real standard country with steel guitar, through rockabilly music, through the stuff that was the story songs. But as I listened to it, it always seemed like the story songs were the heart of it. The other stuff was lighter; and some of it was just completely roots-rock dance music and country swing. I recorded 35 songs."

A narrowing of focus came after singer/friend Lyle Lovett heard the studio tape. "He was the first guy I played it for. He said, 'Well, you know, the story stuff is the hardcore stuff.' He was right, so I decided to set it up so people couldn't miss it. I didn't want to put it in a situation where there were a couple of story songs and a couple of dance tunes and rockabilly things, then a couple more story songs. Finally, it seemed, the only way to go was as hard as we could go straight down the line."

Critics have compared "Tom Joad" to an earlier Springsteen disc, "Nebraska", an intimate record that was followed by the rave-up electricity of "Born in the U.S.A." Some fans have wondered if a similar pattern might occur after "Tom Joad."

"I don't really plan like that", said Springsteen. "When I did 'Nebraska', I had half of 'Born in the U.S.A.' written. At one point after 'Nebraska', I said, 'Gee, I'd like to make another record like that.' But I had half of 'Born in the U.S.A.' and I knew there were two or three things on it that I really wanted to get out.

"But I don't know if somebody can make that kind of record here and now", he said of "Born in the U.S.A." "It seems as if it's a different world out there in some fashion. And I don't know really what I'm going to be doing. But like I say, I have a sense stylistically of where I'm going and what I feel I need to do.... I'm just trying to follow the voices in my head."

Those voices keep telling Springsteen to hammer away at the division of wealth in the United States. "In every study, the division of wealth is increasing"he noted. "And the debate is how much we are cutting back and can cut out of the budget -- not whether some people actually need more assistance. It's always how much money to take away. But what about the people who don't have much to start with?

"That's at the core of what I'm trying to do. It's a search for beauty, and in beauty there is hope, and in hope there is some sense of divine love, of faith, of community and possibility, of things that would combat the brutality and the violence and the suffering. That's what I'm trying to lay out there.

It's a survival guide.
