---
title: "Springsteen Point Blank: The Boss Unabridged"
author: "Steve Morse"
source: "Boston Globe"
date: "1999-10-15"
category: "Book Review"
---

SPRINGSTEEN POINT BLANK By Christopher Sandford Da Capo Press, 446pp., $18

Bruce Springsteen has become the Paul Bunyan of rock 'n' roll. His legend grows every time he picks up a guitar or gives money to a food bank, or wins a Grammy or an Oscar or just about anything else in sight. He's the Jersey Shore kid who made good, though he's also a complex man who was nagged by self-doubt and poverty for years before his dreams bore fruit.

Christopher Sandford's new biography, "Springsteen Point Blank", is a loving yet unflinching portrait of a man who was a C and D student in Catholic schools growing up, but has since become a rock poet often compared with Bob Dylan. The young Springsteen was "a hybrid god who sounded like Elvis casually colluding with Dylan in an echo chamber", writes Sandford, an articulate Briton who has done books on Mick Jagger, Kurt Cobain, Sting, and David Bowie.

Sandford did not gain access to Springsteen (few media types do, because of his tenacious love of privacy), but he still compiled a deft account based on exhaustive research and interviews with Springsteen friends and observers from Elvis Costello to Pete Seeger, and from Norman Mailer to "perennial presidential hopeful Bill Bradley", a Springsteen friend for many years.

The author does a fine job of exploring the Springsteen myth, and the reality behind it. He gives Springsteen full credit for paying dues to become a concert attraction second to none - and a painstaking craftsman who thought nothing of scrawling 20 drafts of a song, or doing three-hour sound checks before a show began.

"The real Springsteen was, at heart, an ordinary man who happened to have the gift of seeming both a best friend and an effigy", writes Sandford. "He loved his wife, baseball and burgers. He could be cheerfully crude after the second beer. But he also felt an obligation to play - to give something back, beyond the coy, call- and-response japes of the megabands."

Springsteen grew up poor in Freehold, N.J., where his father, Doug, had a "failed career in the rug mill and the plastics factory", the author writes.

It was Springsteen's battles with his father that shaped his music. A tempestuous sort, Doug once threw a beer can at his son during an argument and nearly beaned him. But at age 14, Springsteen got his first Fender guitar, played it up to six hours a day, and thus found an outlet and an escape from tensions at school and at home.

Although record labels initially took a dim view of Springsteen ("The loon- panted moguls reserved their loftiest contempt for Jersey greasers", writes Sandford), Springsteen played endless gigs around the Jersey Shore until he got their attention. But his early albums sold poorly, and it didn't help that he signed a deal "on a car roof in an unlit parking lot" with first manager Mike Appel, portrayed as "part grunt and part guru." Springsteen later had to go to court in a messy fight to unseat Appel when new manager Jon Landau arrived on the scene.

Springsteen's music eventually became larger than life - his "Born in the USA"

album sold 12 million copies - but Sandford also looks at the insecurities behind the scenes. He says that Springsteen's self- doubts made him frequently seek out the sympathy of groupies. He had a "gladiatorial sex life" featuring "dozens of women who filled out the time between gigs."

In the late '80s, Springsteen's first marriage, to model Julianne Phillips, flopped (a 1989 divorce settlement brought her $20 million), but his second, to backup singer Patti Scialfa, has lasted through three children. Springsteen is said to be an excellent father who can "play-act or read Dr. Seuss by heart" and who has coached his son Evan's Little League team.

The book is most compelling, however, in its description of how Springsteen's social conscience grew as he matured. The kid who hardly read anything became an expert on Flannery O'Connor and John Steinbeck, among other authors, as his experience of the world widened. And Springsteen put his money where his heart was. He gave thousands of dollars to food banks ($35,000 in Dallas alone, during one tour stop), to miners' wives, to Amnesty International, and even $100,000 anonymously to help an Arizona club owner cope with the bills for his cancer treatment.

He became a man who "flatly contradicted the conventional wisdom of a star utterly in thrall to PR", writes Sandford. "Springsteen cared." The book's narrative ends late last year - before Springsteen's recent reunion tour with the E Street Band - but it's a worthy analysis of rock's most generous soul and, at long last, family man. This book makes one realize Springsteen deserves any peace he has found.
