---
title: "He's On Fire: America's latest rock-and-roll hero has the fans going wild about the Boss"
author: "Bill Barol"
source: "Newsweek"
date: "1985-08-05"
category: "Commentary"
---

It was crazy on South Wabash last week, but a Chicago cop, surveying the scruffy scene, pronounced it "good craziness." By Wednesday about two dozen people had moved their homes onto the street, sleeping under the el tracks and washing up at McDonald's—all on the mere rumor that Bruce Springsteen tickets might soon be available at Ticketmaster. Jim Teymer drove from Madison, Wis.—140 miles one way—to take his place on the South Wabash line. "He's an all-American guy. " said Tevmer. who listens to Springsteen six hours a day, carrying tapes and headphones to work at an Oscar Mayer plant. "I believe in him so much." At the phone company technicians were feverishly working to keep phoned-in ticket sales from clogging exchanges all over the Midwest . Illinois Bell put on-line a computer system that 's usually used to control phone traffic on Mother's Day or handle calls to towns hit by tornadoes.

Washington was crazy, too. A few days earlier, when tickets had gone on sale for the Aug. 5 show that will open the last leg of Springsteen's '84-'85 tour, phone volume more than doubled, tying up circuits from Virginia to the Boss's home state of New Jersey. (The 52,306 tickets for RFK Stadium sold out in just over an hour and a half, faster than D.C. tickets for Prince and the Jacksons had gone.) And in New York, Ticketron sold some 236,000 Springsteen tickets in one day—shattering the old record set by the King Tut exhibit. In the long ticket lines, fans reached new heights in creativity. One bagged the limit—eight tickets at $17.50 apiece—and then sneaked back again in disguise.

"One of our ticket sellers caught him", a weary Ticketron official said. "She told him, 'You changed all your clothes, you changed your wig, but you forgot to change your earring'." No sale.

Pass. Even in the rock-and-roll business, this represents serious insanity.

What's going on? At 35, 10 years after "Born to Run" and 13 months after starting his latest tour, Bruce Springsteen has become a kind of American archetype. He is rock and roll's Gary Cooper— a simple man who expresses strong beliefs with passion and unquestioned sincerity. He is rock and roll's Jimmy Cagney as well—streetwise and fiery, a galvanic mixture of body and soul. Hands down the best performer in pop, Springsteen always gives honest value for the fans' entertainment dollars. And in this summer of mindless Rambomania, the values championed in his songs offer an alternate vision of resurgent American patriotism. Deep affection for home and family informs almost every line, and above all there is a message of faith in hard times—a conviction that although small towns may crumble and factories rust, hope must never die. "Born in the U.S.A.",Springsteen's seventh album,is the strongest statement yet of what amounts to his rock-and-roll world view. It's also a huge seller, at 7.5 million copies sold in America the biggest in the history of Columbia Records, still in the Top 10 after more than a year.

Outside the United States the record has sold 5 million copies in 20 countries, and was the number-one album in Britain, West Germany and the Netherlands last week.

Springsteen's overseas tour this year confirmed his position as an international symbol of America. In Australia, Japan ("Kyoto", a Springsteen associate says wonderingly. "What a response! We felt like we were in New Jersey.") and Europe, kids waved American flags and chanted along with "Born in the U.S.A." "He represents the dynamism of the United States", says Christiane Schaeler of radio-station 95.2 in Paris. Besides, "The problems of city life and the working class are the same everywhere", Scottish music student Michael Hutson said at a sold-out Springsteen concert at Newcastle.

And as European audiences cheered, something curious happened at home: Springsteen stepped over the line in the American mind. He went over there a rock star. He's comingback a symbol.

Springsteen's status as an icon, though, isn't as simple as it seems. It is based largely on "Born in the U.S.A.", a song that younger audiences (and older ones with short memories) tend to take as an exultant anthem for Reagan- era America in fact it is about a vet whose life was irreversibly scarred by Vietnam. The powerful refrain, which Springsteen rasps out in a voice of pure pain, is more about promises broken than promises kept. And although his songs are ultimately hopeful, they are studded with powerful images of despair. The pictures stick in the mind: a drifter speeds down an empty highway past the refinery towers, nowhere to go on a steamy summer night and nothing to do but drive. A kid from a mill town gazes longingly up at a mansion on a hill. A highway patrolman, lonely and confused, watches the taillights disappear as his criminal brother escapes into Canada. These are pictures of an America gone wrong.

Springsteen himself seems uneasy about wearing the mantle of American Archetype. Friends describe him as a genuinely humble man, far removed from the excesses of the rock- star life. "That's really the real him", says Clarence Clemons saxophonist in Springsteen's E Street Band and a longtime friend. "He cares for every person in the audience." Besides being decent, he seems to be canny enough to sense that rock and rollers just don't make very good archetypes—being an icon of any sort is the furthest remove, spiritually, from the idea of rebellion that lies at rock's heart.

Besides, it's heavy lifting being a symbol, and the cost is high. Look what it did to Elvis Presley. The lessons of Presley's lonely life and sad death weren't lost on Springsteen, who once scaled the walls of Graceland in an attempt to meet the King. Earlier this year he released a reworked Chuck Berry song, "Johnny Bye Bye", an elegy for Presley: "They found him slumped up against the drain / With a whole lot of trouble running through his veins..."

"That's one of the things that has shortened life spans, physically and creatively, of some of the best rock and roll musicians—that cruel isolation", he- told Rolling Stone last year. "If the price of fame is that you have to be isolated from the people you write for, then that's too f------ high a price to pay." So Springsteen still mingles with the public whenever he can.

Amazingly, fans tend to respect his privacy. Two nights before his wedding in May, he went out and shot pool with his future in-laws at an Oregon bar. And last week as ticket madness raged through half of America, he dined out in midtown Manhattan with a few close friends. "He tries to control his own life", says an old friend. "He's not interested in being an isolated person."

If Springsteen is reluctant to stand as a cultural symbol, he is even more leery about politics. He has no strong attachment to any party, and his own politics might be described as populist. He probably wouldn't have even acknowledged the 1984 presidential race if President Reagan hadn't made a clumsy attempt to claim the rocker for his own at a September campaign stop.

"America's future rests in a thousand dreams", the president told a whistle- stop crowd in—where else?—New Jersey.

"It rests in the message of hope in the songs of a man so many young Americans admire— New Jersey's own Bruce Springsteen." An associate describes Springsteen as "astounded" by the incident. In October he told Rolling Stone: "You see the Reagan re-election ads on TV—you know: 'It's morning in America."

And you say, 'Well, it's not morning in Pittsburgh . It's not morning above 125th Street in New York. It's midnight, and like there's a bad moon risin'."

So the singer jabbed back, in his own fashion. In Pittsburgh, his first stop after the Reagan remark, he dedicated a song to an activist United Steelworkers' local. In Tacoma, he dedicated a song to a local environmental organization and urged the audience to look into the group. He made pleas from the stage for local food banks in Atlanta Denver, Oakland and Los Angeles—and kicked in a series of $10,000 personal checks besides. He also delivered a few pointed remarks along the way.

"This is a song about blind faith", he told a Tacoma audience. "Like when the president talks about arms control."

But that, intimates say, was only because Springsteen felt painted into a corner by the Reagan remark. Such direct volleys are rare. He is a musician first and last, his messages are in the music, and global concerns don't often intrude. Most often it's the small personal tragedies that count in his world: lost jobs, shattered families, the high cost of broken dreams. On this tour, for the first time, the more somber songs have moved to the heart of the show.

"Highway Patrolman" was a highlight of last year's concerts—a lovely, heartbreaking song about a cop torn between loyalties to the law and his black-sheep brother. "The River" told the story of a working-class kid trapped in a sad marriage; "Johnny 99" was a laid-off autoworker driven to crime by insurmountable money troubles. And across America last year, the words of "My Hometown" resonated strongly at each stop: "Now Main Street's whitewashed windows and vacant stores/Seems like there ain 't nobody want to come down here no more/ They're closing down the textile mill across the tracks/Foreman says these jobs are going boys and they ain't coming back ...."

These are grim messages, but Springsteen is too much a rocker at heart to let the sadder songs overwhelm. What makes his shows exhilarating pop events is the ease with which he shifts gears into high-energy burners like "Thunder Road" and "Cadillac Ranch" - songs that encapsulate all the fire and abandon of the rock-and-roll spirit. Springsteen seems to be everywhere at once on the concert stage: high atop a speaker bank, racing up a stairway to play to the people in the back, tearing back down to the lip of the stage. His shows are marathons, often reaching four hours in length. Says E Street guitarist Nils Lofgren, an established Columbia artist who signed on with Springsteen last year, "With Bruce you wind up treating those four hours as if someone said, 'You've got four hours left on earth. What are you going to do with it?'"

Springsteen, friends say, would rather be doing nothing else than playing rock and roll . Behind every show lies a thought that's central to great rock-and- roll performing—the idea that only this moment matters. Not Yesterday, not tomorrow. but now. His commitment to the moment is total, and every show in every city bristles with passion and good humor. Even the hokey moments are deliriously exciting—like the scene when Springsteen and sax player Clemons ( "The Big Man! The King of the World! The Master of Disaster!") square off at opposite ends of a long arena stage, mock scowling, eyes locked, each playing at full tilt—and then race toward one another to meet at center stage for an exuberant twist, twine or rumba.

Offstage, the singer devotes his formidable drive to a more personal pursuit: keeping his private life his own business. He is surrounded by a determined cadre of loyal friends and handlers, none of whom has much enthusiasm for talking to the press, and Springsteen himself hasn't given an interview since talking to Rolling Stone late last year. "I give my entire energy to the public", he told his new father-in-law after marrying Julianne Phillips in May. "But this is different. Things that are private should be kept private."

But privacy is harder than ever to come by. He is not only a bigger star than he has ever been, but a different kind of star—a political symbol, a national symbol ... and, let's face it, a sex symbol, thanks to a rigorous schedule of weight training that has chiseled him a whole new profile. It's not his first new look. Over the last dozen years Springsteen has worn several faces: the scowling late-Dylan of the late '70s, the leather-clad tough of the middle decade, the earringed singer / songwriter of l974.To start with, back in his hometown of Freehold, N.J. he was a scrawny Jersey kid with an Irish father, an Italian mother and a Dutch name. A headstrong boy who chafed under discipline both at home and in parochial school, he felt everything turn when he bought a pawnshop guitar at 13. "It was one of the most beautiful sights I'd ever seen in my life",he told rock journalist Dave Marsh. "I had found a way to do everything I wanted to do. " Hooking up with a local band called the Castiles, Springsteen began playing in Jersey bars. Stints in four more local groups followed before he landed an audition with Columbia executive John Hammond, who years earlier had discovered Billie Holiday and Bob Dylan.

Hammond gave the young singer 15 minutes of his time. He was stunned.

Springsteen signed with Columbia Records in 1972.

His first LP, "Greetings From Asbury Park, N.J.", was done in just three weeks and showed—maybe too strongly—the influence Dylan had had on Springsteen. Wild torrents of words skittered across the record's surface: "Madman drummers bummers and Indians in the summer with a teen-age diplomat..." Springsteen sang in the album's opening line. Nobody was quite sure what that meant. From Dylan, who had been obtuse for a decade by that time, music fans expected such. No one knew what to make of this skinny Jersey kid with the scraggly beard. The second Springsteen LP, "The Wild, the Innocent & the E Street Shuffle", pared the verbiage back some, to better effect, and played up the jazzier side of Springsteen's music. It also introduced characters who under one name or another would populate all the singer's records from then on: this time out they were Spanish Johnny and Puerto Rican Jane, lonely teens fighting to keep their dreams alive in the big city. A few deejays, including Philadelphia's Ed Sciaky, began to play the records and talk up Springsteen's incendiary live shows. Sciaky, then with WMMR recalls with special fondness the first time he heard "Rosalita": "I thought I'd never hear louder applause.

It was like an explosion."

Unfortunately, ecstatic reception in the clubs didn't mean big sales in the record stores. But Springsteen kept working the East Coast circuit and attracting a good measure of critical attention. His best notice came from a young Boston writer named Jon Landau: "I saw rock and roll future", he wrote in Boston's weekly Real Paper in May 1974, after a typically exuberant show at the Harvard Square Theatre. "Its name is Bruce Springsteen." By October 1975 the singer's small, fiercely loyal group of fans was convinced that Springsteen couldn't be held down much longer. They were right. The third LP, "Born to Run", hit the street like a firecracker, a superb, passionate record that traced a whole heartbreaking day in the lives of Springsteen's urban heroes.

Although some critics dismissed the record's dense sound and complex song cycle as bombastic, sales were brisk—finally—and the album landed in the Top 10. That's when the national media came around. NEWSWEEK and Time featured the singer on their covers—both in the same week— initiating a chain reaction of press coverage that focused on Springsteen more as an event than a musician.

Something of a backlash resulted, and according to associates the young rocker wasn't ready. "But he learned a lot from it", an insider says. "He learned to relax and keep focused on what's real."

He would need all his forbearance. A legal wrangle with Mike Appel, his manager at the time, would keep him out of the studio for almost two years, dampening his upward momentum and causing some observers to write him off.

Springsteen wasn't legally free to record again until May 1977, with Jon Landau now along as manager and co-producer. "Darkness on the Edge of Town"released in 1978, was a grittier work than any of the earlier records—no doubt reflecting the frustrating two-year layoff—and it sounded a theme that Springsteen has continued to address: the terrible gap between expectation and reality in the American dream. Home and family emerged as the only comfort; the title tune reminded listeners how bleak the world can be beyond the safe confines of home, and what a high price it exacts from those who try to break away "Lives on the line dreams are found and lost, " he sang, "I'll be there on time and I'll pay the cost/For wanting things that can only be found/In the darkness on the edge of town."

On subsequent records Springsteen's America grew darker still. "The River", a double LP released in 1980,boasted some of his most affecting work to date, and ended with a jolt: "Wreck on the Highway", a somber Hank Williams sound- alike about a young man who sees his own mortality in a late-night auto crash on a deserted highway. This was deeply moving stuff, and there was more on "The River", but on the whole the record felt bloated, overly fussed over.

Springsteen seemed to be reaching toward something new. Two years later he found it: the surprising and heartfelt "Nebraska, " a bleak collection of folk tunes recorded solo in his New Jersey home. Inspired (if that's the right word) by the story of serial killer Charles Starkweather, it is his worst- selling LP to date, and his most powerful. "[The album] was about that American isolation", he told Rolling Stone, "what happens to people when they're alienated from their friends and their community and their government and their job. Those are the things that keep you sane, that give meaning to life in some fashion. And if they slip away, then anything can happen." His lyrics had grown stronger with each album— quicker, terser, more photographic.

His live shows had continued to attract glowing notices, not least for their skillful mingling of rave-up rockers and American Gothic. By the time "Born in the U.S.A." was released last June, Springsteen was ready to assume the title of The Great American Rock and Roller.

But even those around him are a little surprised at the leap Springsteen has taken this year in the public consciousness. There is a sense that this latest round of frenzy is somehow beyond—a step past even the madness of last year's American tour. "The depth and width of the attention have taken an exponential jump", one associate said last week. "We're only just adjusting to it now."

That means, among other things, fielding ticket requests from high-profile fans in every walk of life—even politics. New Jersey Sen. Bill Bradley will be at the Washington show; some White House staffers, who can usually wangle admittance to any event, won't. A rumor about a secret VIP ticket list at federally owned RFK Stadium was shot down late last week, and the denial seems credible—even Gray & Co., the Capital's premier public relations firm, has been forced to score tickets from scalpers.

In the band, the press of public attention means more excitement focused on the stage. "Right now you've got 7 or 8 million people that are fanatic fans, " Nils Lofgren says. "Two years ago 5 or 6 million of them didn't know who Bruce was. There's electricity that won't ever quite be exactly like this."

Even allowing for rock-star hyperbole, there's truth to this. And although this may not be the time to fan the flames, there's one more reason for people to go nuts about this summer's Springsteen tour: he and the band have been on the road for 13 months, and according to band intimates the last show on this tour—probably in October—will be the band's last group activity for quite some time. Springsteen won't go the way of Prince and retire from the stage but Lord, the man needs rest. No one is sure when work on the next record will start. This summer tour "seems like a friendly thing to do", says a Springsteen insider, "a way to say goodbye for a while."

During his layoff Springsteen will ponder his next album project, although no one around him knows what shape it will take. There is talk of a live record, as there is after every tour, but it's just talk so far. The singer's handlers will spend their time fielding offers from people who want to cash in on his huge new fame. There's been speculation about movie roles, especially in the wake of Springsteen's good performances in two rock videos—"I'm on Fire" and "Glory Days"—directed by John Sayles. It's not likely that he'll accept an outside offer, though. If he does decide to do a movie it will probably be a project of his own devising, like Prince's "Purple Rain." One thing he definitely will not do is accept any of the offers that have come in for commercial endorsements. An associate rolls his eyes toward the ceiling as he promises that Springsteen will never rewrite "Born in the U.S.A." for a TV commercial.

Some things, after all, are too important to mess around with. Springsteen's hard core of admirers talk about how he and his music have changed their lives. They mean it literally. Everyone has a story to tell about the decisive moment when he realized that rock and roll means as much to the man onstage as it does to him. There's a sense of community in that moment between artist and audience, one that other forms of expression can't approach for power and immediacy. In that instant, as guitars thunder and hot lights blaze, Springsteen and his fans share above all a conviction that the music means something—that properly applied, rock and roll can heal broken hearts, mend shattered lives, light the way through hard times or at least ease the pain for one thrilling moment. Another rock idol, Mick Jagger, once said, 'It's only rock and roll, but I like it. " In Springsteen's world the thought would be different. It's rock and roll, he might say. And it matters.
