---
title: "Bruce Springsteen: My Deal With The Devil"
author: "Leonardo Colombati"
source: "Vanity Fair"
date: "2009-06-05"
category: "Interview"
---

He sold more than 160 million records. He won an Oscar, 2 Golden Globes, 19 Grammy Awards. In the last 35 years he managed to sell 25 million tickets for his shows. If you check the list of the most powerful celebrities in the world recently published by "Forbes" his name is at number six: Bruce Springsteen.

When I met him a couple of years ago on the backstage of the Köln Arena, we chatted a little bit about literature (and specifically about Philip Roth, "another New Jersey hero") and then he confessed that rockin' all over the world was still his priority: "I really love to rock the house! Look at tonight's setlist. You see? We'll play 26 songs and only two of them are slow".

In September Bruce will turn 60, but if you have seen him live recently you can confirm Albert Einstein's smart intuition about relativity of time. Today the Boss is in Stockholm and we talk before the second of his three sold-out gigs in the old Olympic Stadium. My first question is:

How do you do that?

"How do I do what?"

It's practically ten years that you are on tour and in the last seven years you have made five studio albums. You were never so prolific as you are now, not even at the beginning of your career. It's like the Stones in the Decca years...

"Focusing is the secret", he says. "You get a little older and you have a defined amount of time for doing your work and enjoying your friends ...I also believe that I learnt how to do my job in a more efficient manner that allows me to get more, to put good music out to my audience. I think that when I was young I had a lot of insecurity, I would second guess everything and the creative intelligence that allows you to make good choices while you're writing wasn't as fully developed. I had a little bit of a shotgun approach, where I was writing a million things and then try to go back and choose what was right. Now I write very concisely, I have few outtakes from my albums, but with the songs I've written and demoed I know that I have something that's gonna make a good record before I even step into the studio. That allows me to do few more records and to tour more constantly, which I love doing, and I have to thank my wife Patti who has taken a large share of the burden at home with the children, so that I can come over here and be able to tour for my fans."

Actually, Patti didn't come for the European leg of the "Working on a Dream Tour" because she has to take care of Even (19), Jessica (18) and Sam (15).

What is amazing is that few days ago, in Netherlands, half of the audience was the same age of Bruce's three kids.

"That's true", he reckons. "We have a new audience that comes each tour, we seem to gather new young faces. Most of those guys weren't even born when I made Born in the U.S.A. That's another reason why this has been a very prolific and active time for myself and the band."

Every time we talk about passing of time during our conversation, I notice that Bruce tends to be more serious and passionate. Although it's clear that he made a deal with the Devil, he's running into "those crisp fall days that come along in September", as he said. I wonder if that's the reason why he chose to make some pop songs for Working on a Dream.

The sound of the great records made by the Beach boys, The Byrds and the Beatles is perfect for emphasizing the main themes of the album, which are Love and Time...

"Yes, or to put it in other words, the transcendence of Time in Love", he says. "It was a talent that I had in the early days of my career to build those kind of arrangements that I hadn't use very much during the past 10 or 15 years, when I tended to strict the band down to a more rock sound, you know ...Rock 'n' roll, folk-rock, roots ...And I kind of tilted away from those very rich pop arrangements until we got a little bit of it on Magic with 'Girls in their Summer Clothes' and 'Your Own Worst Enemy.' I really enjoyed to make them because I love those big sweeping pop records. And now I had my little opera with 'Outlaw Pete', and then 'Queen of the Supermarket', 'Kingdom of Days' and 'This Life'—all little symphonies that sort of tackled different adult issues. It was very enjoyable."

Working on a Dream is an album full of happiness and melancholy. People, in America and in Europe, are living times of fear and anguish. Is that the reason why you play only few songs of the new album and you pick up some of the most political songs in your catalogue, like "Seeds", "Johnny 99" and "The ghost of Tom Joad"? Your fans call them the "Recession Suite."

"We do try to do a variety of things. We want to entertain and we want to bring joy and smile to our audience's faces. We also want to inform and reflect times we are living through. When I put a set together for a tour those are the requirements that I have before I feel that I've created something that is in the tradition of what we've pursued in our work life. You know, after 9/11, in 2002 we had The Rising, than we had Magic a couple of years ago that address a lot of the issues of the Bush administration, the Iraq war... And so, this record came right between those things and the Obama campaign."

A campaign that Bruce endorsed by playing in various rallies before the Inauguration Ceremony held in Washington last January, an unforgettable afternoon opened by Bruce who played "The Rising" in front of 500,000 Americans gathered at the Lincoln Memorial. Few days before, Obama said, "I decided to run for Presidency because I can't be Bruce Springsteen..."

"There was a lot of hope out there", Bruce says, "and remains a lot of hope out there, but the times also became hard, the Country was near down off the cliff by of the last administration."

It was the end of a nightmare...

"Yeah, and so I needed some music on this tour that's gonna reflect the consequences of the choices that we made. So I went back to 'Seeds', 'Johnny 99', 'The Ghost of Tom Joad', Steven Foster's song 'Hard Times'... You know, my favourite promise is to tell the bad news and the good news."

The good news for his fans are that Bruce is still the best live performer in town. Someone said that the world is split in two: whose who adore Bruce Springsteen and whose who have never seen him in concert. People that attended his last shows can easily confirm that. The E Street Band is having a lot of fun.

Now you started to play a game called "stump the band."

"That's something that happened. I started to pick a sign or two out of the audience and more signs showed up, and then somewhere towards the end of the last tour it became a little bit of a thing that we did, and now I save a place at night, I leave three or four songs blank on our setilist and the band knows that I'm gonna run out there and grab a few signs and we're gonna see what the audience want to hear right now. That allows the audience to get their hands on the show, it opens the show up and brings a lot of warmth, and it breaks that law between the audience and the performer down. You know, we don't have a rigid setlist from town to town. We are here tonight responding to you and with your input we would give you a show that is uniquely yours and only get played in your town."

How is it working with Jay?

"Jay is a phenomenon!", he says. "A 18 years old drummer is not supposed to be able to sit in that seat and perform the way he does. A 18 years old drummer he's barely supposed to play in time! He's a real phenomenon and he prepared very deeply with his dad. He takes a certain amount of Max's style that is recognizable and he infused it with his own style. You know, he's playing in punk-rock bands, very hard rock and heavy metal bands, and he brings some of that energy. He's excited to play with the band and he's a lovely lovely kid."

I believe that Jay is the proof that the E Street Band is not only a rock band but it works like a family... When you see the E Street Band live you can feel that sense of brotherhood, what Walt Whitman called the "dear love of comrades..."

"To have the only other guy on that seat in 35 years be that guy's son is a wonderful thing for the band".

Jay will give back that seat to his dad by the time the tour will hit Italy.

There are three shows on schedule: Rome (07/19), Turin (07/21) and Udine (07/23).

Don't you know that with Working on a Dream you became the first foreign artist to reach ten times the #1 position in the Italian album chart?

"Wow, that's incredible!" he says. "Italian audience was always one of the most deepest and the most loyal and fanatic ...It's an endless pleasure to come back to Italy, it's always magic. I always look forward to coming back."

It's a love story started 24 years ago when you played at S. Siro Stadium in Milan for the first time.

"I remember that show pretty well."

Last time that we met, we recalled your second concert at S. Siro, in 2003...

"Yeah. After a couple of songs it started to rain very heavily and we thought that we had to stop because of the lightning. But none of you 60,000 crazy Italians moved, so we continued to play and the result was one of the five most amazing shows of my entire career."

Talking about Italy, Sergio Leone—a film director that exerted a big influence on your work—died exactly 20 years ago. The first track of Working on a Dream, "Outlaw Pete", reminds me the atmosphere of the soundtrack of The Good, The Bad and the Ugly...

"It was a little homage", he laughs. "I had a cowboy song and I said I got to dress this up with a little bit of Ennio Morricone's style. They were fabulous movies and of course Ennio is one of the greatest composers for film in the world. He made an incredible body of work. A lovely man, I had the honour of meeting him a couple of times."

Someone say that rock 'n' roll started to loose its power since iTunes put the idea of disc in a critical position. The album format – its length, its structure, the lyrics printed on the sleeve, reclaim a certain attention, it's an experience similar to reading a book. The best artists of the Sixties, the Seventies, the Eighties, trusted in that kind of attention and that's why they could use their expressive freedom at its maximum potential even if they were doing mainstream music. Take the Beatles, for instance: in 5 years, they moved from "Love me do" to "A day in the life", and people were following them.

Now it's seems to me that the new ways of listening music don't allow the same liberty. How do you deal with that?

"My theory is that you have to go about your business the way you go about your business. In other words, the world of music—and the world period—change constantly. If you live to be my age you've seen great changes, you know? When I started recording there were only records, then I saw the cassette tapes, I saw cd's ...These things change on a 10 ten year or 12 year cycles, and they will continue to change probably forever. What doesn't change is the artist's commitment to his audience, his commitment to be understood, his commitment to creating a body of work that hopefully will have meaning for the listeners, and then you have to trust that that work will be communicated to those listeners in some way. Maybe not the way you intended, but I think there are people out there who are always searching for a deeper experience. Rock 'n' roll has been like a secular religion in the second half of the 20th Century: there were people who sought a context for the answers to the daily life and daily problems and to dance and to be exhilarated and helped through struggling times. My job is to provide content and music that would address those issues. That is the way that I serve my people and my audience. The only thing that I know to do is to continue to do that, and then I look to the vehicles that are available to me at any given time, whether it's the internet or a cassette tape or digital press, whatever ...So that's the way that I approach this issue and I don't have all the answers and everybody does it in a different way... You know, I used to love the big album covers, they were magic. Well, they're gone now, something else is there. You are livin' your times and I always thought that if Shakespeare was alive today he would be on the internet!"

Talking about secular religion I always thought that Dylan and yourself were the authors of pop music's New Testament, the first who talked about adult issues in rock 'n' roll. You wrote "Thunder Road" in your twenties, but there was already a line that says, "I'm ready to grow young again..." Your characters always live with the uncertainty, the contradictions and the compromises of the adult world, and that's why maybe "Thunder Road" talked to me when I was 15 years old and continue to talk to me now...

"That was a funny song", Bruce recalls. "It was recognising the lost of innocence that was throughout post-Vietnam America. Why did I say that I wasn't young anymore? Because nobody after Vietnam was truly young or innocent anymore. Somehow, we were all been felt responsible for the times we lived in, and even a 24 years old young man could feel young in the early Seventies after 50,000 dead. Those were extremely adult issues and if you were a teenager you had to face it because of the draft, you couldn't ignore the course of history in those days. Everyone knew someone who died, everyone knew someone who didn't come back from the war. I liked the romance of rock 'n" roll but I had also to face the sense of the real world. We were all a sort of romantic realists, you know ...and still I am, I think..."

Show time is near. But I want to know about Bruce's future releases.

In the last couple of year you wrote some solo stuff...

"I'm always writing", he laughs. "I write all the time."

It should be your next project?

"I don't know. I think that the E Street Band will probably take a rest for a little while. But it all will happen again. We're lifers, we're gonna go on forever."

What about the Darkness on the Edge of Town box-set?

"Oh yeah, that's something we're working on. We take it slow and try to put something together that would be nice for fans."

Bruce, before we finish ...We were talking about requests. Can I do mine?

"Sure."

I would love to hear "Once upon a time in the West" while you are entering on stage in Rome, like you have done a couple of times in the past...

"Okay, let me write it down and see what we can do! Take care my friend."
