---
title: "Trouble in the Heartland"
author: "Bill Flanagan"
source: "Point Blank Magazine"
date: "1988-01-01"
category: "Interview"
---

**Flanagan:** You said once that a story's only good if it's in some way your own story. To what degree are your songs you story?

**Springsteen:** Well, the details are obviously different. The ol' names have been changed to protect the innocent. It would vary; some songs would be autobiographical or very close. They're all emotionally yours. They're part of your emotional life and in that sense, you could say the songs are all yours.

In the sense of the detail that you hang the emotions on – that'll vary. I'll go out and meet a kid in a bar and something about him will give me an idea for a song. I guess if you traced from the beginning to the end of the live record, that's pretty much my story. It's not my complete story, but you'd get a pretty good idea of the past ten years, just the stuff that I've been going through in my own life.

I don't know if I play characters, but I write in different characters. It's kind of a twofold thing. If you write in or through another character, part of it is you get the audience to walk in somebody else's shoes for a while. Which is good. And sometimes it gives you the distance necessary to tell a particular story, which if you told in the first person would come off sounding either too much or maybe too sentimental. It's also a technique, and it works like that.

To make it real you have to have some enormous piece of yourself in it. For it to be just believable, credible, to create a character that is living and breathing. If I sit down to write a song, that is what I want to do. And I've always done that best when I've had a good deal of myself, and the things that are at stake in my own life, in the music. And I've always done it most poorly if I fell back on a device or something where I just didn't get it, where I didn't get to the well, you know? I'll write something sometimes and I'll think, "Well, gee, that's kind of clever", or "It plays with words a certain way." I always throw that stuff out. It never makes it to the record.

To me a song begins when you create the living, breathing human being. And that goes for whether it's "Papa-Oom-Mow-Mow" or something else. That's its sense of aliveness. That is the essential thing I got from rock & roll – a sense of aliveness, a sense of vitality, a sense that there is life somewhere.

And that's what I look for in my music: Is there somebody in there when I write a song? Have I made this person real? To me that's the essential thing.

And to do it you don't have to write fancily or intellectually. It's in "Twist and Shout;" it's in anything that has impact. I think it has impact because some sense of life, sense of living, and sense of the possibilities of life and living has been communicated. And it's never been better than in a song like "Twist and Shout." That record! To me that's just a great, great song.

Very difficult to write!

Chuck Berry created great characters. Which I'm sure had to be part of him and part of what he imagined. Like he said, he was writing all them high school songs when he was thirty-two! But he knew what it was about. His thing was fantastic – tremendous use of detail. Which in my later writing particularly is something I've really tried to work on, to get better at. Because I admire his music and that unbelievable sense of detail that would bring the whole verse alive.

**Flanagan:** What's an example of a song where you fell back on craft, on a device?

**Springsteen:** Oh, God. Let me think. I don't have a pure example of it 'cause I figure for the most part I've thrown them out...I wrote "She's the One" [Born to Run] because I wanted to hear Clarence play the sax in that solo (laughs). I sort of went back and wrote the words to it just 'cause I wanted to hear that beat and hear Clarence play that. That's kind of a reverse way of doing it, so maybe that one. But most of the stuff ends up on the floor because it's all pretty obviously bad. It's just not exciting and it's not compelling. Now things can be compelling just musically. On "She's the One" I wanted that sax solo and I wanted the guys to play the beat and I had a production idea, and so it was operating on a different level, and there's a lot of stuff that works like that. I think that later on I tended to get a little more lyric- oriented first. So even something like "Glory Days" [Born in the U.S.A], which I thought was a good dance record, I sang on acoustic guitar and tried to make sure that the people in that song were solidly there.

**Flanagan:** For "She's the One" you actually pulled lines from your old songs: "French cream won't soften them boots / And French kisses will not break that heart" is from "Hey Santa Ana."

**Springsteen:** Oh, yeah! All those early songs. Sometimes I'll have a couple of lines that can sit around for four or five years. I knew they were good lines but they never found exactly the right setting. In those days I used to switch and trade all the time. You could do it with a lot of that stuff. I do it a little bit now, but not as much as I used to. It still happens on occasion.

**Flanagan:** Like "I got debts that no honest man could pay" showing up in both "Atlantic City" and "Johnny 99" (Nebraska).

**Springsteen:** Yeah. That was just two songs I wrote and happened to use the same line in. Then when we decided that the [Nebraska demo] tape was what was the best record of the thing, there we were. But what I would do normally is go back and rewrite one of the lines in one of the songs (laughs). That wasn't done intentionally.

**Flanagan:** Ever worry that a song's too personal? Will you change details so you won't get nailed for it?

**Springsteen:** It would depend on if it was good or not. If it was a good song and I made it work... well, I suppose you have some inner protective mechanism that is operating all the time that keeps you from putting out stuff that's too much. And I'm generally a too much person. It just depends on if the song is right or not. I guess I've written some personal music, and if the song is real good it's okay. If it's a good song and you've treated it correctly. I mean, if it's personal to the point where it's just terribly, horribly sentimental...I go for sentiment; I think there's a moment to be sentimental.

The end of the live record was a time like that; I said, let's end it with "Tenth Avenue Freeze-Out" and "Jersey Girl." That was not a moment to be afraid of sentiment. So there's a place for that. But I think you draw different lines at different times. If it was like, "Ooh" (makes pained face), if it embarrassed you terribly it would just be a bad song.

I guess I've written some real personal song: the songs I've written about my father. Even if they're not all exactly autobiographical, they have a feeling of the relationship. "My Father's House" [Nebraska] is a personal song. I guess you just find a way to do it. Generally, if I came across that problem it just meant I hadn't done it very well. I hadn't written a very good song.

**Flanagan:** What's your father's reaction to those songs?

**Springsteen:** My relationship with him has changed a lot. Actually since I got out of the house, it changed almost overnight. It was very interesting. He changed a whole lot, and I did. I guess we were not people who talked directly about those sorts of things. And maybe that's how I was doing it. He is not somebody who would show a reaction in one fashion or another. In a funny way, and certainly not the best way, the air kind of cleared. Some of the stuff I've written was pretty close, like the [monologue] I did on the top of "The River" on the live record. So that ended up being the way that I dealt with it. I did ask him once what were his favorite songs, and he said "The ones that are about me." (Laughs). He was kind of laughing when he said it, so I don't know. Like I say, it's probably not the best way to find your way through the woods on those sorts of things, but it was part of the way it happened for me and him.

I guess our relationship is a lot more direct now. So it's a good thing. But it's always hedging, y'know? I guess I did it as a way of making sense out of the whole thing to myself, and I figured, well, maybe somebody else won't follow the exact same path. We had a lot of unnecessary distance for a long time. But it's been really great for quite a while now. But, hey, fathers and sons.

**Flanagan:** Your images of tough or angry little kids are pretty memorable – from "The Angel" (Greetings from Asbury Park, N.J) to "Used Cars" (Nebraska).

**Springsteen:** I guess "Used Cars" was pretty autobiographical. My mother always loves that one. My parents love that song 'cause we just had so much car trouble! It was beyond belief. We had some bad cars. I remember my dad had this one car that wouldn't go in reverse and we constantly had to push it backwards out of parking places. The whole of Nebraska was the tone of what my youth felt like to me. From when I was a little kids to my early teens. That song just kind of popped out.

**Flanagan:** Long ago you said you didn't want to get married 'cause you weren't ready to write married songs. You knew this would come back to haunt you. Have you written any married songs yet?

**Springsteen:** I'm workin' on 'em. (Laughs). It's just another part of life. For a long time there were a whole lot of things I was trying to avoid. Part of it because I thought, "If I don't do this and I don't do that, well, maybe I won't get older." And at the same time I pursued a certain course that I hoped would help me learn how to grow and remain intact.

That's a funny quote, but that was exactly the size of it, that was exactly how I felt. Not only did I not...I couldn't imagine writing any! And on the live record, Tom Waits sort of did the job for me. [Waits wrote "Jersey Girl."] So that was a funny thing. But I had certain preconceived notions of what I thought the rock & roll dream was about. And I was very immersed in it in my early twenties. I guess later on I realized that's only a starting point; the whole thing's really just where you get off at and start going.

If I write a real good song that means something to somebody out there, it can only be a starting point for them. Then they have to take it and run with it, and I have to do the same thing. What it really asks you to do is to take this and find your place in the world. Maybe this'll be helpful. Maybe not.

Basically the whole thing is about attempting to be useful. So the greatest rock song, no matter what it is – "Like a Rolling Stone" or "Twist and Shout" or "Shout" – it's all just a place to get started. It's not something to live by. Or it's not something to live within. I was at a place where I had certain ideas about the whole rock & roll thing that I thought were right, and certain ones that were sort of abusive.

I think the whole act of getting married – you've got to come in from the cold when you get married. This is about a relationship with somebody who is outside my work, outside my job. Doesn't have that much to do with playing the guitar (laughs). It's a little bit of an introduction to the real world. I think in a variety of different ways, for a quite a few years previous to when I got married, I was going in that direction. Not necessarily that marriage is the only thing that puts you in that place, but it is one of the things. And I realized that you can't live within that rock & roll dream that I had in my head. If you do then you're really betraying its very promise. You're bullshitting. If you try to, then you become some self-indulgent decadent asshole. And it's not worth it. It's not a worthwhile thing for a man to be involved in.

That's not in any way devaluing the importance of what that dream is or what it implies. But it's really just a starting point. It's like when I heard "Shout", or "Having a Party." "Having a Party" is a fascinating record – it always struck me as a very sad record. As I hear the Sam Cooke version, it contains a world full of sadness. Just his voice, just the singer.

Those songs were really just a place to go from. Then you have to take it.

Which is why getting caught up in the iconography and all the hero worship and idolization of rock stars or movie stars or people who win game shows is a distraction. The night I climbed over the wall at Elvis' house, I don't know who I thought I was going to meet. I really wasn't going to meet Elvis. Maybe I was going to meet some dream, or some idea I had of myself. And probably the biggest favor that that guard did was stop me at the door.

So I think that all the great records and great songs say is, "Hey, take this and find your place in the world. Do something with it, do anything with it.

Find some place to make your stand, no matter how big or small it is." And maybe in some fashion that directs you toward some sort of honest life. That's a pretty wonderful thing for a record to do. Particularly since it only costs about ninety-nine cents. [Laughter.] Hey, even if it costs seven or eight bucks, it's still a pretty good deal!

That's why I always felt like playing the guitar – hey, that's a decent job.

You can make an honest job out of it. And at this point that's really all I'm interested in. But I had to get out from under my misinterpretation of what that whole rock & roll dream was about. It took me a long time to do it.

Partly because to do it means you have to accept death itself. Which is okay, because that's how you grab ahold of life, man, and go. I know a lot of people, even friends of mine, who just don't want to deal with it. It's too frightening. You have to step into the real world.

There was a review in the Village Voice of The River. I don't even remember who wrote that thing but I always remember he said the character in "Ramrod"or different people on the record, were attempting to flee from time itself.

The whole rock & roll thing has become such a big thing and has meant so much to so many different kinds of people and has taken up such an enormous amount of time in people's lives that it's real out of proportion. There's a certain loss of perspective to the whole thing. I sought rock & roll out of for many contradictory reasons: I wanted a refuge, I wanted an escape, I also wanted a weapon. Ultimately, I wanted a vehicle for confrontation in some fashion. I think initially it was just the joy of pulling me out of my everyday life.

Your interview with Neil [Young] was interesting. You said that the thing rock & roll didn't pick up from country and rhythm & blues was the sense of consequences. I guess in my music one of the things I wanted to do was provide that set of consequences. You said rock & roll was Saturday night and country was Sunday morning. Well, I wanted Saturday night and Sunday morning – but I also wanted Monday through Friday! And particularly in the stuff I was writing later on, that was where it was all set. Because there's a lot more Monday through Fridays than there are Saturday nights or Sunday mornings. And those are the days you've got to live with. Those are the days everybody's got to live with. So I wanted a music to live with – truth and consequences! (Laughs.)

I felt like if I was going to move on, if I was going to take this stuff with me, it was going to have to answer those questions for me. It was going to have to make sense of my life now. And the thing that I found in "Be My Baby" is not going to answer the questions that come up when I have to deal with my wife now, or she has to deal with me. Not that that is lost. That's a part of it, it's a piece of it.

**Flanagan:** Deciding to let the dream live inside you, instead of you living inside the dream.

**Springsteen:** That's exactly the size of it. And I think at the moment in '75 when my dream in its own funny way came true, I had to deal with the consequences. At that particular moment I realized I did not want to live inside it. There was nothing there except an empty room. There weren't many other people there. Now my job was to find my way out of it. Because that was the only way I was going to be worth anything to anybody, including myself.

That was the only way that I was going to be able to maintain my own vitality and life.

Once you're inside that dream room, things about you that are important and relevant in the real world to your friends – and people who will hear your music – will just strangle and die. And so will you. But it's very difficult because that room is always very comfortable and there's an illusion of safety. There is an illusion of security which is all really an illusion. It's really a very dangerous place. There is little safety there. There's no real security there and there's no life there. There's really nothing. So then you've got to create something else. In my writing after Born to Run I've been trying to find that alternative: Where does the man with the guitar fit?

Where's my place in the world? I guess that's all anybody's trying to do really, no matter what their job is.

**Flanagan:** A lot of these ideas show up in even your earliest songs: the character in "Lost in the Flood" (Greetings) or Spanish Johnny, who sees the barefoot street boys kissing each other and just doesn't get it, can't figure out the changed in his world.

**Springsteen:** Yeah, I guess you can go back and find that stuff on the early records. It's not even a result of being successful, or being a famous guy who plays the guitar. It's something that people wrestle with their entire lives, no matter what their job is. Everybody has a choice whether to stay in that dream room or go out and build something that's real. You can stay in there real easy. All you need is a six-pack of beer and a television set. You can just let yourself go in there. I guess that particular moment was my moment of confrontation with it, but it's not a unique or unusual situation for anybody.

**Flanagan:** In "Prove It All Night" (Darkness on the Edge of Town), you talked about knowing "what it means to steal, to cheat, to lie." You touched on similar emotions in "The Price You Pay" (The River). It seemed you were forcing your audience to acknowledge a dark side of you. Was that a reaction to all the hoopla and hero worship that surrounded Born to Run?

**Springsteen:** It was a reaction. I guess the Darkness record and the other records since Born to Run have been a reaction to that particular moment I had there: I crashed into myself. Previously we'd had a pretty free-floating thing going. We banged around in a station wagon or a van and played in clubs, and I got tremendous satisfaction out of doing that and enjoyed it immensely. I was single; for twenty-three it wasn't bad, y'know? Darkness was when I realized that it's a nice way to make a living but it's no way to live, and I realized that...I was unusual....and I had something...

Like I say, I had the guitar and the girl. I just crashed into one of the walls of the dream room. That really is what it's about. I just realized, "Wait! There's walls!" And that I was inside something. And I had to bust out of there, and the way to do it was, I needed some solidarity. If that guy on Born to Run did get away, he had to go back. He had to! 'Cause that's where the people are. That's where everybody was! And basically I just wanted to be there. Just for myself. Not for any other reason.

It's a funny thing. I was alone and I got very used to being alone. I could live that way, or I had been able to Pretty easily. But there was a little bit of time running out on that idea and I had to see what was happening, what was going on, to be a part of what was going on. And I think that "Badlands", that whole Darkness record, was about that. I wanted to come back and confront some things. What had happened after Born to Run? Where were my friends? Where were the people that mattered to me? My frivolous little trip – okay, it was fun, but in and of itself it just didn't hold enough to keep me very fascinated.

And I had the experience of watching the ones that went before. There were maps. And when a lot of them got to that place they read, "Dead end." So you've got to backtrack and find a different road, one that may be passable.

You can't set up a house at the end of that dead-end street. I believed that didn't have to happen, I believed that it could go on. The thing that had sustained me and given me inspiration and strength and support when I was a child could do the same for me as a man. If I could figure out a way to find it for myself. I believed that the things that happened to me, the perversions of life, the distortions of living that come with success, were truly distortions. And if you could see through that clearly enough, and the things that were contradictory and paradoxical maybe are not resolvable, but if you could just learn enough to not let them drive you crazy – then you could look clearly enough into the eyes of the guy across the street or your wife or your girlfriend and have something to say to them. And they could say something back.

Really, I picked up the guitar because I wanted to talk to somebody. That's really about the size of it. That was my main interest. I had things to say, and mainly it was just, "Hey, hello. Here I am, there you are. Let's start a band, let's do something together."

So when I got out there I realized, "Who is there to really talk to, and what have I got to say? If I get jammed up out here, what am I going to have to say that's worth listening to?"

A lot of fun comes with it, a lot of good things, but mainly the guy goes back to town because it's lonely out there. There's not enough out there. There's not enough in the dream room. You come out because you want to talk to somebody. You're bored and you're lonely. And not only that but you have an idea. I developed an intent over the years that I've been in rock bands: that you didn't have to come apart, you didn't have to fall apart. And there are ways to deal with distortion of life that becomes a part of your life once you get there. If you just solidly and with some real thought put your energies in that direction, it can be done, and it should be done.

I just wanted to talk to somebody. I wanted to be part of something. And if the end result is that you've got nothing to say, and that you're in some isolated dream place, well then you just didn't do it. (Laughs.) You didn't do it! And I didn't see any reason why that had to be. So beginning with the Darkness record, and on through, I've been trying to see (laughs) what a band would sound like with a swinging little guitar man.

That's me. That's kind of how I see myself: I'm the guitar player. What's it sound like out there with a guitar player? I guess it's kind of a big idea on one hand, but it also just feels like common sense.

A friend of mine said the other, "I get in bed at night and feel like I've had an honest day." That's a pretty good thing to have. It's a pretty hard thing to come by and it's hard to hold onto. The whole thing was such a powerful force in my own life that I just wanted to hang in there.

"What's everybody else doing?" Maybe that's why. Plus, I think at the time I was fearful of disconnection. And I felt like there was a moment of truth.

Well, really there isn't any moment of truth – there's moments of truth. But at the time I felt fearful. I had a tremendous mistrust of my own success and the things it brought with it, because I recognized these things as powerful.

And I think that in a funny way those impulses probably made me dive more intensely into the stuff that's on Darkness than I would have if I'd had just a moderately successful record. First of all I felt in a position of privilege, and I felt that with that came responsibility. Didn't have to worry about the rent and heat now. I did it enough so I knew what it was about, and I saw my parents do it their whole lives. And I thought, "Well, now I don't have to do it." And maybe I felt like who I was there, at that moment, was where the best of me lay.

I think that there probably are some funny songs to write about flying in Lear jets (laughs) or limousines. But all I know is, when I got to that place I felt that the action was back in town, in neighborhoods. And I was still basically there myself. I hadn't really gone anyplace. I was still in Jersey.

I lived on a farm most of that time.

That just seemed to be where the action was, that seemed to be where the things that were important were. I mean yeah, you can get a laugh out of writing something about...

**Flanagan:** A pink Cadillac?

**Springsteen:** Yeah. That's fun. But it's not something to make a career out of.

**Flanagan:** Because you're so well-know, you can distance yourself from a song or project yourself further into a song just by choosing a detail. For example, when you said, "I get up in the evening", instead of "morning", in "Dancing in the Dark" (Born in the U.S.A), it was like a flag saying "This is really about me."

**Springsteen:** Yeah, that was an interesting thing because originally that song was, "I wake up in the morning." Jon (Landau) had been bothering me to write a single, which is something he rarely does. But he did that day. And he wanted something direct. That seemed to be what he was hitting on me for at the time.

I was angry. I had written a lot of songs and was kind of fed with the whole thing. We'd been making the record for a long time and I was bored with the whole situation. That particular night I came home and sat on the edge of my bed and the thing I remember thinking first was that we had a record, but it wasn't necessarily finished; I could change the whole thing right now if I wanted to. That's all I remember thinking: if I wanted to I could do something right now that would change the whole thing.

So I picked up the guitar and I had this line: "I get up in the morning and I ain't got nothing to say." I had that line for quite a while. Then I said, well, I've got to be direct, this is about me. What do I do? "I get up in the evening." And that was it. The rest of the song popped out. I realized I'm bored, I'm tired, I'm sick of no action.

Making a record tends to be a lot of mind work. Sometimes I like that, but I'm also oriented toward doing things and playing. How many times can you look at the same thing from a different angle? On one hand, the analytical side of my personality has been very helpful in learning, because I always question what I'm doing and look at it from every possible position, and then I change it.

I'm somebody who has tremendous swings. I'll do that for a long time and then I'll swing toward a tour that'll go for a year and a half and I'm out there going crazy every night, and then I'll swing way back. I've never really balanced those things in a natural fashion. I do one till I want to explode and then bang! I'll contain all this energy for a long time and I'll let it loose and then I'll exhaust myself. Then I'll go back to the other thing and wait till I feel that way again. It provides a certain sort of motivation, but it doesn't seem to be a way to live. We've done it a little extremely in that the tours have all been super-long, very intense, a lot of activity. And then the time off has been long also. I'd like to balance that out a little better in the future.

**Flanagan:** Do you have a particular person you write for?

**Springsteen:** No, not really. When I write it's for whoever's out there, whoever wants to listen. When I go on stage, I always remember being at a Who concert at Convention Hall in Asbury Park in '65. When I come out on stage I always imagine a kid there. It's different now because when we go out now I see a guy who was there when he was nineteen, ten years ago, and he's got a kid on his shoulders and his wife with him. And then there's some sixteen-, seventeen-year-old kids there. So it's a little different now, but I generally think, "Maybe there's a fifteen-year-old kid here who's thinking of playing the guitar. Maybe he has some ideas. And tonight I've got to be at my best, I've got to be better than I ever was. 'Cause I want to inspire that guy. It don't matter if I was good last night or how I'm going to be the next night."

So that's real good. It keeps me right in the moment.

**Flanagan:** In "Nebraska" you sing in the voice of a killer. Did you think twice about creating sympathy for someone who maybe doesn't deserve any?

**Springsteen:** Who doesn't deserve sympathy? (Laughs). It's not a question of sympathy or compassion; it's more a question of what does writing about that sort of incident imply? It's a funny question because basically, in the end, I was probably using Charlie Starkweather to write about myself (laughs) for the most part. If you look at a book like [Norman Mailer's] Executioner's Song, you can say, "Does just writing about something in some fashion glamorize or romanticize it?" I don't know. I think every time you write a song like that, it's a question. I guess when I wrote that song I felt pretty down, so I went with it.

**Flanagan:** On that old demo "If I Was the Priest", Jesus is coming after you with a gun. All through your work there's the feeling of God chasing you and you saying, "Get back!" Other songwriters have the hellhound on their trail, but you're usually fleeing the Hound of Heaven.

**Springsteen:** Probably (laughs). I just had all that stuff on my ass when I was growing up. It's interesting, because once I graduated grammar school I demanded to go to public school. My parents wanted me to go to Catholic high school, and I'd just had it up to here. The whole thing wasn't working for me.

Can't say I ever looked at the songs in that light, but I wouldn't be surprised if it's in there because once I got out of grammar school I just wanted to be left alone by all the orthodox ideas. I suppose I found my own way around it. But just the heavy sale, the hard sell, the pressure, and all the stuff you see on the TV. Maybe it works for some people. Obviously it does. There's people that are saved. I'd just as soon have a different way to go.

I don't really sit back and judge that particular situation at all. Faith is such a personal thing... whatever brings you that particular faith in yourself I think is important, but I'm really pretty outside that whole thing. That just didn't seem to be it for me. Once I pulled myself out from the Catholic school in the fifties – a notorious experience – finding that place in some orthodox religious situation is just not something that came to me, or even an approach I would take toward solving my own particular problems or questions about what life is about.

I guess for me it's all the unanswered things that are important. It's the holes – the mysteries – that seem to be where it is! That's where it is in songwriting. It's when you don't know how you wrote that song that you've probably written a good one. I guess I always felt that sort of direct contact with whatever you believe God is, or to believe you know exactly what it is – "It's Catholic and it's not Jewish", or "It's Jewish and it's not Fundamentalist; this is all there is to it" – that's living inside the dream.

For me, that's living in the dream room. How could anybody ever get to the true nature of what spirituality is by believing that if you don't have the green card or you don't have the red card you're going to be left out? That seems, just on the face of it, totally ridiculous. Not to mention just the presumptuousness of feeling that you know exactly! That very literal translating of the Bible and the belief that, "This is it, this is all there is, and don't try to step outside this thing!" always seemed a little presumptuous. I don't see that sort of arrogance – to believe you've got the inside dope on what the word of God is – would line up with some sort of real spiritual feeling.

People use the cloak of spirituality as a controlling device. That just strikes me as false. Basically that's how it was used on me as a child. There was not an interest in bringing me closer to what God really is. It was really used purely as a controlling device, by people who had had it used on them in that fashion. By the time I got to be thirteen, I'd had enough. I just told my parents, "No more!" And I always felt like that spiritual thing has run through all my music. Certainly "Born to Run" is, "Nebraska." But to me it's in the mysteries and the holes that the whole thing seems to lie. And that's fine with me. That feels right to me.

**Flanagan:** No outside force ever damaged the Catholic Church as much as superstitious nuns and bad teachers.

**Springsteen:** Yeah, and it's been spoiled for them also. So it's a shame. It's the perversion of religion and spirituality into superstition. That's what it was for me. I'm sure other people have other experiences. I suppose it's a shame that mine was such a negative one. So now I go down my own road. But I know people who have gotten a lot out of it, and people who have had similar experiences to mine and still get sustenance from it. I'm pretty open about the whole thing at this point. I don't feel the need to define myself in that fashion. The closest you can get to what I feel about it is in my music.

**Flanagan:** A lot of people who reach your position turn to religion: Elvis, the Beatles, Dylan, Michael Jackson, Prince. It seems like once you become the Man at the Top, it's the only place to go.

**Springsteen:** I think it's 'cause people demand too many answers. I can't speak for what it was like in their particular cases 'cause I don't know. But in general, people demand answers. And in a funny way it's very childish. A child wants his daddy to know everything. I suppose a strictly literal interpretation of holy books at least provides you with an illusion of those things. Maybe that's enough for some people. Maybe the illusion of those things is what they're going to live with. But I think the demand for those answers is arrogant. What do you need all the answers for?

I think there are people who reached a moment where their lives weren't working and the things that they thought would give them satisfaction did not, or did not bring peace of mind. Maybe people find it difficult to live with the idea that that very peace of mind involves the acceptance of just letting things be. So the natural thing to do is look around. And if you say, "I need an answer for this", there are plenty of people who will give you one. "I got it right over here – it's $29.95, it slices, it dices!" There's points in people's lives when they need that concreteness. There can be a point when that's necessary. I've met people who have been on hard drugs who were saved through fundamentalist religion, were saved by Jesus. They really were. They really were. Now, once again, that's a starting point-

I guess it depends on what people's needs are. I never felt a need for that particular sort of concreteness. Maybe I'm lucky. Me, I like it wide open. I got to places where things weren't working for me and my old ideas had broken down because I'd outgrown them, but I still did not want to move on because of what it implied. If you outgrow an idea it's got to mean you're growing up, you're getting old. I think people get to a place where their old ideas stop working, and moving on is always frightening. To really be alive you have to be constantly moving on into the unknown. You have to move out into that dark.

And what you have for comfort is your wife, maybe your friends, a body of work, something you've done that you're proud of. Your only comfort is going to be your connection with those things. And then you attempt to extend some sort of line out into some sort of community. That's why people huddle together.

And that makes sense. Because you've got to constantly be stepping out into that dark, into that unknown place. 'Cause that's where the next day is.
