---
title: "The Boss Lets Freedom Ring, With Banjo"
author: "Dan Barry"
source: "The New York Times"
date: "2006-06-22"
category: "Concert Review"
---

Note: Published 2006-06-28

THIS is what you would do. Close the bedroom door to the quiet indignities of childhood. Unclasp a small but hefty box to reveal a now forgotten device called a portable record player. Plug it in.

Make a selection from the albums your parents bought when they used to listen to music. No, not Mitch Miller and his Gang. No, not Herb Alpert and the Tijuana Brass. Where's the skinny guy with the reedy voice, always singing about freedom? Here. Pete Seeger.

Place the needle down on a disc now spinning in promise, catch the groove, and allow old words and ancient melodies to seep in until they could never be removed. The skips and hisses on the scratched records are as ingrained as the choruses in memory.

You did not listen to be cool; in this age of the Rolling Stones and the Beatles, you were unlikely to impress a girl by singing the opening lines to "Erie Canal" ("I've got a mule and her name is Sal ..."). Not that you ever summoned the nerve to speak to girls, much less sing to them.

No, you listened because you found something affirming in songs that honored hard work, struggle and standing up for what you believe. You felt connected to your immigrant roots, to your African-American neighbors and to your country, of which you sang with innocent pride. You felt connected to your father, to your mother.

In the era of King and Kennedys shot, you would sit beside the record player and sing, "Oh Mary don't you weep don't you moan, oh Mary don't you weep don't you moan. Pharaoh's army got drowneded, oh Mary don't you weep." And feel the consolation.

In the era of Vietnam and civil rights battles, you would sing, "We shall overcome, we shall overcome, we shall overcome someday." And believe it.

Then you grew up. Vietnam ended like an unfinished sentence, and King and the Kennedys settled into the abstraction of history. Your mother died and your father stopped singing. The albums went to storage.

Nearly 2,800 people died a couple of miles from where you worked; for weeks the smell of the pyre wafted through your Midtown office window. Your country went to war. Hurricane Katrina crushed one part of the South, and Hurricane Rita crushed another.

You sensed the unimpeded march of Pharaoh's army.

The other night you went to a Bruce Springsteen concert at Madison Square Garden. Some celebrities sat a few rows behind you, and a group of older women, including the singer's mother, sat beside you. You feared your own presence constituted a security breach, but the lights dimmed, no one tapped you on the shoulder, and so you stayed.

In the stage shadows you could see the silhouette of Mr. Springsteen shaking hands and slapping the backs of musicians, 17 or so, as they stepped up and took their places in what is being called the Seeger Sessions. One held a banjo, another an accordion, another a tuba. This was not the E Street Band.

Then music exploded from the stage: rock and bluegrass, jig and reel, spiritual and swing, honky-tonk and acoustic blues, working separately and in concert to coax from dormancy all those old songs that once meant something to you.

Think of it. In this era of post-post-post irony, there sounded in Midtown Manhattan the lyrics to "Erie Canal", with that mule named Sal. In this era of Operation What-Was-It-Again, there rang out a song nearly 200 years old, "Mrs. McGrath", whose soldier son's legs were swept away by a cannonball on the fifth of May.

In this era of Paris Hilton idealization, of pleasure found in a tycoon snarling "You're fired", tens of thousands of people sang of climbing Jacob's ladder; of keeping your eyes on the prize; of overcoming.

Mr. Springsteen occasionally slowed the celebration to a contemplative pace.

His "My City of Ruins", written for Asbury Park, then applied to post-9/11 New York, now ached for New Orleans. His version of "When the Saints Go Marching In" became a prayer.

More often, though, he raised his audience up with old songs and spirituals that he had infused with rocking urgency, then toyed with so that brass and guitar could harmonize, an accordionist could jam with the Boss, and a tuba player could know rock-concert adulation.

People danced, those celebrities swayed, the mother beside you raised her hands in joy. And you sang again:

```
Brothers and sisters don't you cry
There'll be good times by and by
Pharaoh's army got drowneded
Oh Mary don't you weep.
```
