---
title: "Springsteen covered by women: The best of the best, part 5"
author: "Jay Lustig"
source: "NJArts.net"
date: "2017-07-02"
category: "Commentary"
---

The is the fifth and longest edition in the "Springsteen Covered by Women: The Best of the Best
"series, which I started more than two years ago, and which has included some of the most-viewed posts in the history of NJArts.net. I included 37 performances in this one, to bring the list to 99. (UPDATE: There have been two more installments in this series, bringing the total number of songs to 150. Here is an index to all the songs.)

Many of these songs were suggested by readers in the comments section of the previous posts, and on Facebook, so thanks to everyone who helped out in that way. I found many of them on my own, though, including live versions of Springsteen songs by Cher (!) and Tina Turner.

Note: I left Patti Smith's "Because the Night off the first four lists only because I felt that since Smith co-wrote the song, her version isn't really a cover. But I've changed my mind, and included it on this list. I included three other versions of "Because the Night", too: 10,000 Maniacs' famous cover, as well as less well known interpretations by Marianne Faithfull and the team of Garbage and New Jersey's own Screaming Females.

So here is Part 5, in alphabetical order (by the artist's last name, or the band name).

Emily Barker and the Red Clay Halo: "Tougher Than the Rest"
Andrea Begley: "Dancing in the Dark"
Billy the Kid: "Jackson Cage"
Basia Bulat: "Glory Days"
Anna Calvi: "Fire"
Cher: "Tougher Than the Rest"
The Chromatics: "I'm on Fire"
Kelly Clarkson: "Secret Garden"
Coops & the Bird: "Thunder Road"
Rose Cousins: "If I Should Fall Behind"
Cowboy Junkies: "State Trooper"
Marianne Faithfull: "Because the Night"
Garbage and Screaming Females: "Because the Night"
Patty Griffin: "Racing in the Street"
Emmylou Harris: "Mansion on the Hill"
Emmylou Harris: "My Father's House"
Juliana Hatfield: "Cover Me"
The Henry Girls: "If I Should Fall Behind"
Moa Holmsten: "Dancing in the Dark"
Jill Johnson: "No Surrender"
Juliette Lewis: "Fire"
Mary Lou Lord: "Thunder Road"
Nalani & Sarina: "Save My Love"
Jennifer Nettles: "I'm on Fire"
Aoife O'Donovan: "Nebraska"
Lindi Ortega: "I'm on Fire"
Grace Potter and the Nocturnals: "Atlantic City"
Linda Ronstadt: "If I Should Fall Behind"
Patti Smith Group: "Because the Night"
Solas: "The Ghost of Tom Joad"
10,000 Maniacs: "Because the Night"
Kate Tucker: "I'm on Fire"
KT Tunstall and Julie Fowlis: "State Trooper"
Tina Turner: "Dancing in the Dark"
Linda and Robin Williams: "If I Should Fall Behind"
Lucinda Williams: "The Rising"
Wendy Wills: "Youngstown"
