---
title: "Springsteen covered by women: The best of the best, part 7"
author: "Jay Lustig"
source: "NJArts.net"
date: "2021-08-06"
category: "Commentary"
---

It's been a while: I posted the sixth part of NJArts.net's "Springsteen Covered by Women: The Best of the Best" series in November 2019. People keep releasing great Springsteen covers, though: I was reminded of that this week, with Cannons' new "Dancing in the Dark" (see below). And so it is time to add a Part 7.

It actually has been a great time for Springsteen covers, as musicians have been posting all kinds of interesting new versions on the internet (see Melissa Etheridge's "Pink Cadillac", for instance, below) while the pandemic has forced them off the road. Plus, people keep telling me of older covers.

This brings the total to an even 150. I'm particularly glad to add covers of seven songs that haven't been included among the previous 120: "The River", "Ain't Got You", "My Beautiful Reward", "American Skin (41 Shots)", "New York City Serenade", "Land of Hope and Dreams"
and "There Goes My Miracle."
There are many more covers I'm aware of that I wasn't able to include, so I will probably keep going in the future.

There is an index to all 150 songs in the series HERE.

Some of the songs were suggested by readers in the comments section of the previous posts, and on Facebook, so thanks to everyone who helped out in that way. (I didn't include some suggested songs only because no YouTube video is available.)

Here are the 29 songs, in alphabetical order by the artist's last name, or the band name.

Cannons: "Dancing in the Dark"
Jen Chapin & Rosetta Trio: "American Skin (41 Shots)"
Melissa Etheridge: "Pink Cadillac"
Roberta Finocchiaro: "New York City Serenade"
Molly Healey: "Dancing in the Dark"
Sarah Hepburn: "Adam Raised a Cain"
Alexandra Jardvall: "My Beautiful Reward"
Alexandra Jardvall, with Richard Hauer: "There Goes My Miracle"
Lauren Jenkins: "Hungry Heart"
Lauren Jenkins: "Stolen Car"
Lizanne Knott: "Stolen Car"
The Last Internationale: "Land of Hope and Dreams"
Lorde, with Marlon Williams: "Tougher Than the Rest"
Rett Madison, with Scary Pockets: "I'm on Fire
Carolyne Mas: "New York City Serenade"
Melissa McClelland: "Factory"
Anne McCue: "Born to Run"
Angie McMahon: "The River"
Aoife O'Donovan, with Greensky Bluegrass: "Atlantic City"
Joan Osborne, with The Waybacks: "I'm on Fire"
Micol Picchioni: "Born to Run"
River Kittens: "Atlantic City"
Amy Shark: "Secret Garden"
Garrison Starr: "Born in the USA"
Stjerne, with SMAF: "Streets of Philadelphia"
KT Tunstall with Rhythms del Mundo (featuring members of the Buena Vista Social Club): "Because the Night"
Helen Watson: "Ain't Got You"
Waxahatchee: "Streets of Philadelphia"
Jane Willow: "Dancing in the Dark"
Nancy Wilson: "The Rising"
