---
title: "Bruce Springsteen: At Wembley Stadium"
author: "Biba Kopf"
source: "NME"
date: "1985-07-04"
category: "Concert Review"
---

Note: Published 1985-07-13

I HAVE seen the future cast as a rock'n'roll song. I do not much like what I see: Bruce Springsteen everywhere confirmed as the way forward – the museum- keeper to the flame as the Messiah (yet again). The future once more beats a retreat to the past. Your place in it hinges on your having a share in the collective memory that governs it.

The collective memory is selective. It only remembers the good times, intrusive bad times – factory shutdowns, wars, girls turning you down – serving to point up all the more poignantly the lost good times that preceded them. To bring those good times back, Springsteen – an undeniably bighearted and enthusiastic keeper of the r'n'r flame –pitches his camp/show in this perfect past.

An "I remember" rap precedes his key songs. Each one recalling the swell years running with the boys back in smalltown New Jersey. They boys he grew up with became his E Street Band. Together they still quite endearingly behave like peewee gang, striding the plateau of the Wembley stage like bare-assed kids mimicking a New Orleans marching band or indulging daft impressions of ZZ Top, complete with 40 gallon hat. There is no malice in the latter impression. This is only loudhearted buffooning, for no irony mars Bruce Springsteen's soul. Irony, in his book, is a sophisticated trick of the mind adults use to protect themselves from the inevitable pains of growing up. Springsteen naturally acknowledges he is getting on, pushing 36 in fact, but he wants to feel every wrinkle being etched into his forehead. He has no need for protective intellectual headgear.

He wants to be hit between the eyes with the hurt of every factory shutdown. He has become a master of recording the slow shock brooding in sudden disenfranchisement, of having your ticket to the American dream abruptly withdrawn. Sadly, his shock always turns to resignation, mute anger becomes wallowing melancholy. The characters in Springsteen songs have a seemingly bottomless capacity for taking slaps in the face without their faith in the dream being too severely shaken.

In what should be his most defiant song, the one that lists entering a foreign war blind, returning broken and forgotten to no job prospects, the one called 'Born In the USA' that opens his concert to the accompanying video projection of the Stars And Stripes, Springsteen, brought so close to acknowledging complete despair, still affirms his faith in the flag, as if his accidental birthright affords him the automatic protection of being one of God's chosen people and despite all the evidence he has gathered to the contrary.

The highways of America are strewn with great US novels (Dos Passos' USA, Steinbeck, Kerouac) and songs recording the century's shortchanging and outright betrayals of the American working man. It would seem that in walking these traditions Springsteen is less interested in learning from them than simply conforming to them. A new song, however, called 'Seeds' almost breaks the mould by asserting rage above acceptance. In outlining the misery of migrants heading for the Texan oilfields in search for work, Springsteen summons an unparalleled ferocity at their plight, usefully contrasting their enforced idleness to the band's splendid piston-pumping simulation of the oil wells in motion.

The rage, however, is shortlived. Here comes another "I remember..." to disperse it, more nostalgia for cars, gals, guitars, waterholes, rivers, endless rock'n'roll summers. The further the Summer of Youth recedes into Springsteen's memory, the more warmly he reheats it, remoulding the component parts into the shape of rock'n'roll eternals, asserting through sheer energy of his stagecraft and his undeniably likeable nature that there is only one way forward and it shimmies like this. That is, like it always has done.

But his belief in the regenerative force of rock'n'roll is misplaced. The myth of Presley, the Beatles, etc emerging from one long Saturday night of '50s teendom is only so much mist. The past appears rosier through its haze. It allows for misinterpretation, the renaming of high spirits as heroism, for the canonisation of the state of being young, thereby establishing it as the touchstone to the collective memory of any generation recognizing the classic r'n'r strains in his songs as the one pattern for fun.

For sure it is Springsteen's undeniable achievement that his songs are the key to the collective memory for so many. And undoubtedly he has defied the general rule that the saturation level of playing the sports stadia of the world automatically snuffs the spark.

The sheer weight of numbers is on his side. The collective memory he keeps is subscribed to by millions, and the USA, frozen out in 1977, is reborn in a Springsteen song to once more reign supreme in the popular subconscious. Kraftwerk's Autobahn has been deserted for Route 66, the future has been re- cast as a rock'n'roll song. I do not much like what I see.

© Biba Kopf, 1985
