---
title: "Bruce On Sirius: Enduring The Lockdown"
author: "Bruce Springsteen"
source: "From my House to Yours"
date: "2020-04-08"
category: "Other"
---

Curator Note: This is a collection of transcripts of Bruce's radio show "From my House to Yours". During the initial COVID lockdown in 2020, Bruce broadcasted a radio show every few weeks from his home studio. Playing some of his favorite tracks, and discussing current events. I don't know who transcribed these specifically, maybe Backstreets or Brucebase. I know Brucebase has the recordings, which can all be found [here](http://brucebase.wikidot.com/stats:downloads)

**April 8**

"My children are all off in their own homes, and claim they don't want to come and visit, in order not to kill us. So ... it's hard to argue against. The only thing that I'm really sure of is that after all this is over, the world isn't going to be quite the same. I think we're all going to be suffering some post- traumatic stress, and people are going to take a while before they trust one other again, before they can come close, before they can gather at events that have been so wonderful parts of the celebration of being human and being together.

It's lonely down here on the farm. I got my baby with me and we're doing great: Patti and I have a new rhythm to our day. But it's tough not seeing the people you care about. These days, you can feel like you're looking out over the edge of the apocalypse. I think the strangest thing is how the world suddenly feels so unsafe. A walk. Going to the grocery street. A drive and then a walk along the beach, which is now closed. All you know is, that feeling of safety that you once had has been stripped away.

Everybody's wakin' up these days with that feeling that it's Groundhog Day.

Every day is like the other day. And that's like the other day. And that's like the other day. I get up. I exercise. I exercise some more. I go downstairs. I eat breakfast. I eat breakfast again. Then I sit in front of the fire and I read a little bit. If we're lucky, we get outside, get around the farm a little bit, Patti and I. And then we get to have dinner. And then we have some more dinner. And then we watch the news. It's all bad. And we got to bed. And then we get up and we do it again. Looking for a little light at the end of the tunnel.

The folks who are suffering the worst are the folks who have no safety net, nothing to soften the blow of the incredible unemployment that's sweeping the nation out there, folks who live week to week, and just one week out of work, simply is enough to change and kick the bottom out of your life.

There is an element of the spiritual that you have to call on to make it through these days, whether it's prayer, or whether it's just praying together. I'm not sure, but I know that when these days end, and they will end, there will be a religious celebration, a spiritual celebration.

There is that cliché that says women like to talk, and men don't like to talk.

But all I can say is that in our house, we're talkin' (laughs). We're doin"

some talkin.

I believe that some of the love that has grown, the togetherness that has grown ... you see people come out on their balconies and applaud all of the health workers who are putting themselves on the line day after day after day.

Their courage and their bravery is truly something I have never seen before

"Are you alright out there? Are you social distancing? Are you washing your hands? are you staying in your home with your loved one. I think that's the question of the year: Are you alright?"

If you're there by yourself, that ain't so bad! I did 35 years by myself ... and I liked it! (laughs) My son's doing that now. Both of them. And they sound pretty happy. ... What do you miss? Everybody misses something. What do you really miss? I miss going to Max's and the Windmill and getting a hot dog. I miss walking along the promenades, the beach and boardwalk in Asbury Park. I miss sitting at the bar, having some beers and drinking with some friends. And I miss baseball. Baseball. I'm not much of a sports fanatic at all, but I do like baseball. And this is for all the things we miss. All the things that make us, us. And all I know is, when this is all over, I'm going to take Patti to a baseball game."

**April 24**

"I've lived in the United States for 70 years now, and I have to admit I've often been disappointed in our failure to live up to our ideals. But I also have to say, I've never really been able to deny that there's a promise that constantly resides in the American people, that could make us the great democratic nation that we carry in our hearts and in our dreams. And if we put our hearts and our lives together and fought for the very ideals, those of equality, of liberty, of social justice, of compassion for our neighbors, we would find that this is where our strength resides. And we have it within in our power to create the kind of humane society we've always dreamt of. Now, all of this sounds corny when you say it. But it ain't corny when you do i

I guess one of the hardest things about recent times is the distance you have to place between you and your loved ones. The inability to hug them and to kiss them and to comfort them ... it is painful to live without. You know, my mom has had Alzheimer's for 10 years, and she lives in the present. This moment and this moment only is hers. And so touching her, and hugging, and kissing her are very, very, very important for her life experience right now.

And one of the things we've had to suffer with is, we can't do that right now, for her safety and for her health.

New York has struggled so tremendously with this disease. My son lives up there, Downtown, and of course we've been worried him, and about everybody else, too. I'm gonna send these next two songs out to all the health care workers, all the doctors and the nurses who've put their lives on the line, for the critically ill, and the citizens of New York.

"I think one of the most frustrating things about this virus is not knowing how long we're going to have to live like this. I have a blackboard that I mark the days on, as if I was in prison. I think I reached a month and a half a few days ago. So looking at the months ahead, it's going to be quite a while before we're able to open up our society, before people are going to be able to trust one another to congregate in large or small groups, before there is music, before there is sports, before there is family gatherings. It's a very disheartening view. I think it may take a vaccine until we're all really comfortable with one another. So we've got to stay strong, and stay at home, and stay togetherI think one of the hard things in difficult times is keeping faith, and not letting the struggle and the pain ... and the grief overcome you. That's very, very hard. There's a lot of people that have suffered a lot of loss over these days. Now our thoughts and out prayers, of course, go out to you, but I know that that is cold comfort, because those of you who have lost husbands and wives and sons and daughters

There was an oped a while back in the New York Times that I would advise every American who cares about his country to read. It is called 'The America We Need.' Now let me paraphrase from just a small, small piece of it. Frank Delano Roosevelt said liberty requires opportunity to make a living, a living decent according to the standard of the time. A living which gives a man or a woman not only enough to live by, but something to live for. Now the ... pandemic has laid bare the inequalities in wealth and in health that plague our nation. In Michigan, hard-hit by the coronavirus, African-Americans make up 14 percent of the population but 40 percent of the deaths from this disease. So many disenfranchised Americans lack the essential liberty to protect their own lives, and the lives of their families. This pandemic has shown the great divide between our American Dream and American reality, between current America versus the ideals enshrined in our founding documents.

Now that's just a small piece of the editorial, and I hope I didn't do it a disservice. But all I know is, here in the beginning of the 21st century, in Paterson and other New Jersey cities, in Michigan, in rural America, and all across the United States, this reality is so frustrating that, as the great Marvin Gaye said, then we should want to holler.

**May 6**

As hard as it is to believe right now, your children will go back to school.

Churches will be open and full. You will once again hug and kiss family members at your gatherings. You will shout over the noise of a crowded bar to order a drink and speak to your friends. You will buy a hot dog at Yankee Stadium. You will walk through the streets of your hometown, free and easy.

You may hold a complete stranger on a crowded dance floor. And 50,000 people will once again scream their heads off somewhere in New Jersey.

It's funny how the weather this past two and a half months, since the lockdown ... the weather has taken on a whole new level of importance in my life (laughs). I check the forecast three or four times a day. I pray for summer. I suffer through gray clouds and rain. I got a dog that wakes me up like clockwork, every morning at sunrise. So around 6:30 every day, I am standing in our front field, waiting for the sun to come up. And on those days, when it rises and washes a golden light across the fields into the trees, I take a deep sigh of gratitude, and I am momentarily deceived into believing that things are almost normal, or at least that they will be. I never thought that the emotional beginning of my day could so depend on a change in the weather.

I can tell you one thing I'm doin' every day. Come rain or shine, at 4 o'clock, I'm setting myself up a drink. A shot and a beer ... I'm not waitin"

til 5 o'clock ... or a little vodka and soda. And I am on my way to shortly putting a new shine on this whole experience. I take no shame in it, at this place and time, to looking into something that is gonna fuck me up.

I was out last night on an errand, around 9:30. Let me tell you who else was out there: Nobody. Nobody at all. The streets were barren, the highway was not alive. It was like, while we were waiting for the apocalypse, it had already happened.

"All I can tell you is, when this experience is over, I am gonna throw the wildest party you have ever seen, and you, my friends, are all invited

Now all this staying at home can create tension between you and your significant other. After about two months of 24/7, you are gonna know exactly where your relationship stands. Tolerating each other is not enough. Deep down, you've got to like one another. You've got to give each other as much room as you can.

"Besides the bravery of our front line health care workers ... the folks who've stepped to the front during this national crisis, whose service goes less remarked upon, are the working people who keep our society running. Our sanitation workers, our grocery clerks, the folks who are in low-paying service jobs that require a high degree of contact with the public, they are carrying the full weight of this virus for all of us. The coronavirus has revealed, once again, the fissures in our society, the inequalities that put the backbone of our society, our working people, at risk.

Remember to practice your social distancing. We need a new dance called The Distance. You have to be 10 feet away from your partner to do it. All right, somebody work on that.

"Well, I'll tell you what frustrates me right now: The fact that, as a country, we were so ill-prepared for this pandemic. And it's not like it hadn't been predicted. If you willfully ignore science and scientific fact in the year 2020, you end up suggesting to people that they should ingest household products to clear themselves of the virus. Not a smart idea. You and all those you're responsible for will pay the price. Now, the head of our government knew as early as January of the dangers the coronavirus posed to our country, and failed to act. Thousands of mortal lives could have been saved, had their warning been heeded

We are currently living through a once-in-a-century event, and as such, it feels biblical in nature. We have been visited by a plague. Our strength resides in our ability to hope, and in our faith. So I went to The Bible, and I found an Ephesians quote. 'I pray that the eyes of your heart may be enlightened in order that you may know the hope to which He has called you."

'That the eyes of your heart may be enlightened': I like that. We could use some enlightened hearts, right about now"I was living in L.A., and I walked into the Sunset Marquis motel, one late afternoon, and I walked into its Whisky Bar, and there was exactly one patron sitting at the bar: Joe Strummer. We had never met, so we introduced ourselves to each other, and we had a relaxed and sweet conversation for 45 minutes or so. It was the only time we ever met, but I always felt very, very close to him, as an artist, and was deeply saddened at his young and untimely passing.

"Now I used to regularly go to Freehold Memorial Day Parade. It was kind of the beginning of each summer. I'd ride my bike down there and take a spot on the corner with everybody else, just watch it go by. And it was something beautiful in its small town consistency. It was just the same year after year, since I was a child. You know, the fire engines, the marching band, the Veterans of Foreign Wars marching in lockstep. A few classic cars, ending at the racetrack. And that was about it. Right now, I miss a parade. I'd like to go to a parade on an early summer day, right about now.

**May 20**

Times like these are testing. They reveal character. They can bring out your generousness or your selfishness, you kindness or your cruelty, your love or your fear. Just take a look at our man at the top. Hard times do that.

"So I take a daily drive, because driving has always relaxed me, and it gets me out of Patti's hair for a while. I drive all my old routes, through all my old towns, day after day. I see old shops shuttered, what folks there are on the street, in masks. My favorite hangouts closed. Take-out only, God bless 'em. And I drive out to Manasquan Inlet, my old man's stomping grounds, to sit and watch the boats for a while. But they've closed all the parking places, and the boardwalk's closed, so I find a side street. And I sit, roll down the window and feel the ocean breeze and read the newspaper for a while.

"Thirty million workers joined the jobless ranks over the last two months.

That is frightening and heartbreaking. A day doesn't go by when I don't thank my lucky stars, when I don't know how profoundly fortunate I am.

"So after an hour, I fold my newspaper, I start the car and I head home. And on my way on 79, I pass the ShopRite that I opened with The Castiles during its Midnight Madness opening in 1965. We played out in front of the supermarket. And it was the only time during this day that I saw a parking lot filled with cars, and it almost brought me to tears

I've been thinking. Dating: how's that going, all you singles out there? How is love in the time of corona? I am old and I simply can't imagine it. I mean, it's got to be happening. But how? I mean, is testing going on? I guess there's virtual dating. Why wouldn't there be? I don't know how satisfying that can be. No physical contact. Yikes! There's no sex, I would imagine. I guess there's also sexting and naked selfies. They say naked selfies is the new seduction. I read an article that said this is the golden age of naked selfies. Hell, I may take a few myself when this show is over. Why not?

Desperate times call for desperate measures

When this is over, and I do have faith that it's gonna be over, I want to do the simple things again ... get an ice cream cone at the Jersey Freeze. Be able to walk inside, step up to the counter and say, 'soft vanilla, dipped in chocolate, please.' I wanna get a pizza with my pal, the ex-mayor of Freehold, and all my old friends, down at Federici's. I wanna take in the boardwalk on a quiet weekday night in Point Pleasant, lose all my money at the wheels of chance. Hang at the beach till around 5:30 or 6, when the evening cool just begins to drift in, and that sun is low and warm on your skin. That is my favorite time of the day. Then I may head into Red Bank and stop at Jack's record store — stay strong, Jack, we're lucky to have a record store in Red Bank, that's for sure — and maybe find a place to sit outside and have a drink, just surrounded by folks without a worry, just going about their business. Never has the mundane seemed so ... attractive. Yep, when this is over, I just want to take a walk downtown.

Now, the toughest thing about lockdown is the feeling of not knowing what the future holds, the feeling of your whole life being placed on hold. Time seeming to move quickly but slowly. Now empty and unused time, I don't care for, especially at 70. I'm counting my days and, my friends, I've got things to do that involve me and you. My son's 25 and he worried about the time it's taking out of his life. But I feel like Muhammad Ali, who was at his prime — I'm in my late prime — but who was at his prime, and the years that he could have spent boxing were taken away from him. So I try to heed my deceased Aunt Eda's advice. She always said, 'Just live every day live as if you're gonna live forever.' I like that: 'Live every day as if you're gonna live forever."

I think she meant, 'Greet each day on its own terms, as an opportunity for life's possibilities. Breathe it in, let the world open up before you, and prepare yourself to accept it in its entirety, on its own terms, with a vengeance.' Well, I'm ready, and I hope you are, too. But right now, the waiting is the hardest part.

Now the protesters that we've seen in some of our state capitols, pushing to get the country to open up and cut back on some of the mitigation, concern me.

I worry for them, first of all. Because up to this point, that mitigation's been our only defense against the deadly virus. I know folks need to get back to work, they need to get their bills paid, they need to feed their families.

But the country should reopen in a cautious, safe and responsible manner, not carelessly, in a gesture that will cost tens of thousands of lives, prodded on by a president who went against his own government mandate in advising citizens to 'liberate Michigan' and 'liberate Virginia.' And frankly, that is the wrong language right now, and it pissed me off. It's just weak and irresponsible. It was the gesture of a man willing to roll the dice with the lives of those who put him into office, and their children, and their elderly friends and families at risk, for perhaps nothing more than an election-year ploy. It's cowardly."

**June 3**

8 MINUTES - how long it took George Floyd to die, with a Minneapolis officer's knee buried into his neck. That's a long time. That's how long he begged for help, and said he couldn't breathe. The arresting officer's response was nothing but silence and weight. Then he had no pulse, and still it went on.

That goes out to Seattle, to New York, to Miami, to Atlanta, to Chicago, to Dallas, to Philadelphia, to Washington, to Los Angeles, to Asbury Park, to Minneapolis, and to the memory of George Floyd. May he rest in peace.

"As we speak, 40 million people are unemployed (and) 100,000-plus citizens have died from COVID-19, with only the most tepid and unfeeling response from our White House. As of today, our black citizens continue to be killed unnecessarily by our police, on the streets of America. And as of this broadcast, the country was on fire and in chaos. We are 153 days to our next election. God help us. Vote. That's what makes us great. When the politics of paranoia, division, prejudice, intolerance, fear — all that's antithetical to the American idea — hold court in the land, we are in deep trouble, my fellow citizens.

```" Thank you very kindly, my very dear friends.

 These churches are really loaded tonight. Never in the history of this nation have so many people been arrested for the cause of freedom and human dignity.

 You know, there are approximately 2,500 people in jail right now.

 Now let me say this: the thing that we are challenged to do is to keep this movement moving. There is power in unity and there is power in numbers. As long as we keep moving like we are moving, the power structure of Birmingham will have to give in. And we are probably nearer to a solution to this problem than we are able to realize, and don't worry about your children — they are going to be all right. Don't hold them back if they want to go to jail, for they are doing a job for not only themselves, but for all of America and for all mankind.

 Somewhere we read a little child shall lead them. Remember there was another little child just 12 years old and he got involved in a discussion back in Jerusalem as his parents moved down the dusty road leading them back to that little village of Nazareth, and when they got back and bothered him and touched him and wanted him to move on at that moment he said, "I must be about my Father's business."

 These young people are about their Father's business. And they are carving a tunnel of hope through the great mountain of despair. And they will bring to this nation a newness and a genuine quality and an idealism that it so desperately needs.

 Now we are going to see that they are treated right. Don't worry about that.

 The Justice Department is already in here, and they don't have some small fish from the Justice Department, they have some of the big fish in here. We are reminding them at all times that these persons are political prisoners. There is a distinction between a political prisoner and somebody who is there for getting drunk, or somebody who's there for engaging in a robbery, and we're gonna see that they are treated right, and go on and not only fill up the jails around here, but just fill up the jails all over the state of Alabama if necessary.

 Keep this movement going. Keep this movement rolling. In spite of the difficulties — and we're gonna have a few more difficulties — keep climbing.

 Keep moving. If you can't fly, run. If you can't run, walk. If you can't walk, crawl. But by all means, keep moving." - Martin Luther King Jr., 1963

The Birmingham Movement was organized by the Southern Christian Leadership Conference, to bring attention to the integration efforts of African-Americans in Birmingham, Ala. Their confrontations between young black students and white civic authorities led to the municipal government changing the discrimination laws, and was part of the broader movement towards civil rights that changed the face of the nation.

 "Now, almost 60 years later, we wake again, to an America with burned-out buildings, torched police cars, and shattered shop windows, a cost that we're paying for another half of a century of unresolved fundamental issues of race.

 We have not cared for our house very well. There can be no standing peace without the justice owed to every American, regardless of their race, color or creed. The events of this week have once again proven that out. We need systemic changes in our law enforcement departments, and in the political will of our national citizenry, to once again move forward the kind of changes that will bring the ideals of the Civil Rights Movement, once again to light, and into this moment.

 We remain haunted, generation after generation, by our original sin of slavery. It remains the great unresolved issue of American society. The weight of its baggage gets heavier with each passing generation. And as of this violent, chaotic week on the streets of America, there is no end in sight.

 We have a choice between chaos or truth, a spiritual, moral, democratic awakening or becoming a national fallen to history, with critical issues we refuse to or couldn't address. Is our American system flexible, to make, without violence, the humane, fundamental changes necessary for a just society. The American story, our story, is in our hands, and may God bless us all. Stay safe, stay well, stay strong, "

 **June 17**

Well, it is the responsibility of those who lead us to inhabit the nexus where our national political and spiritual lives meet. The United States of America is ultimately a nation of souls. In times of historic calamity and tragedy, it is necessary for our leaders to administer, not only to our social needs, but to the union of souls that is our common citizenry. To tend to our wounds, both physical and psychic, and speak to the strengths and fears of our national family.

 "Huguette Dorsey, 94 years old, Somerville, N.J. He coached several championship-winning junior high girls basketball teams.

 "Luke Workoff, just 33, from Huntington, N.Y. His passion was for his family and his friends.

 "Torrin Jamal Howard, 26, from Waterbury, Conn. A gentle giant, an athlete and a musician.

 "Kyra Swartz, 33, from New York. She loved to volunteer for pet rescue organizations.

 "José Torres, 73, New York. A restaurateur favored by the city's salsa music's stars.

 "

These are just a few of the souls who have passed away due to the coronavirus.

 "Now one of the most heartrending aspects of these deaths is that the virus has stolen from us our rituals: our funerals, our wakes, our house meetings with family after the burial, our ability to stand by our loved ones, to touch them, to kiss them as they pass, to look into their eyes, and to let them physically know how we love them. This is the cruelty of this disease, to say our last goodbyes to our loved ones by phone, and then to return home alone, to an empty house. It is a heartbreaking and lonely death for those afflicted, and for those left behind, to pick up the pieces.

 "Now when my father died, my close friends and my brother-in-law, we stood in the graveyard, in the midst of our large family, and we took shovels, and we buried my father ourselves. It meant a great, great, great deal to me, and is a memory I'll cherish as long as I live. The importance of that ritual, and to stand with my loved ones on the burying ground.

 Real illness is frightening, and make no mistake about it, these are frightening times. The footage from inside some of the ERs that we've seen should be enough to convince you to stay safe, behave responsibly and heed the warning of your medical professionals. The souls intubated, struggling for each breath, are a testament to the deadliness of this virus, and to the bravery of our frontline doctors, nurses and health care professionals. Our health care professionals who willingly put themselves in harm's way, risking their own lives for others, deserve some special dispensation in heaven and here on Earth. We owe them our eternal thanks.

 Laneeka Barksdale, 47, ballroom dancing star.

 "Terrence McNally, 81, Sarasota, Fla. Tony-winning playwright of gay life.

 "Sterling Maddox Jr., 78, Arlington, Va. Known for his friendliness.

 "Kious Kelly, 48, New York City. A nurse in the COVID fight.

 "Angel Escamilla, 67, Naperville, Ill. She was an assistant pastor.

 "Lorena Borjas, 59, New York City. A transgender immigrant activist.

 "Robert Lee Amos, 66, Columbus, Ind., expert marksman and firearms instructor.

 "John E. Broadly, 84, Scituate, Mass. He was always honored to march with the American Legion in many parades.

 "Joseph Thomas II, 88, New York City. He represented theatrical, TV and movie personalities.

 "Marco DiFranco, 50, Chicago, police officer who was never at a loss for words.

 "Joseph Migliucci, 81, from White Plains, N.Y. A fourth-generation owner of Mario's restaurant, a Bronx institution.

 "Janissa Delacruz, from Haverstraw, N.Y. She was known for always having a smile on her face.

 "And Sharyn Lynn Vogel, 74, from Aurora, Colo.. She was a photographer, a gourmet cook, a traveler and a sparkling hostess.

 "God bless them all."

 "The election is only months away. Vote! God help us all. Vote before it's too late.

 Lila A. Fenwick, 87, New York City. She was the first black woman to graduate Harvard Law School.

 "Alan Merrill, 69, New York City. He was a songwriter who wrote 'I Love Rock 'n' Roll."

"John Prine, 73, Nashville, Tenn. American songwriter.

 "Clair Dunlap, 89, a pilot who was still teaching people to fly at 88 years old in Washington.

 "Marylou Armer, 43, from Sonoma Valley, Calif. A veteran police detective.

 "Roger Eckart, 78, from Indiana. A retired firefighter and old-school barber.

 "Merle C. Dry, 55, an ordained minister in Tulsa, Okla.

 "John-Sebastian Laird-Hammond, 59, from Washington, D.C. He was the member of a Franciscan monastery.

 "Larry Rathgeb, 90, West Bloomfield Hills, Mich. He was the engineer behind the first 200-m.p.h. stock car.

 "Myles Coker, 69, New York City. He was freed from life in prison.

 "Doris Brown, 79, Merrillville, Ind. She died on the same day as her husband.

 "Gwendolyn A. Carmichael, 72, Detroit. She was the definition of love, loyalty, and the ability to serve others.

 "Billy Ross, 53, Milwaukee, staff member and mentor at the Milwaukee Rescue Mission.

 "Claudia Obermiller, 73, Nebraska, deep-hearted country girl.

 "Adam Schlesinger, 52, of great New Jersey band Fountains of Wayne.

 "Norma Hoza, 101, from Wilmette, Ill. She was the mother to six sons.

 "

May they rest in peace.

 "Well, that's our show for you now. We send our prayers out to the deceased and their families, and to all of you. American citizens, unite. Your country needs you, you countrymen need your care and compassion. And this is our moment.

 **July 15 - Summertime**

I loved, and love summer. As a child, I became summer. I melted into the hot tarmac, I rolled myself into a sand ball at the beach. I slid beneath the murky water, ducking summer dragonflies at the Freehold Pond. I sat in the tops of trees, feeling the summer breeze trickle over my freshly cut Saturday afternoon flattop. I'd stand with my bike 'neath the August sun by the roadside, watching the locals on the road crew lay down the steaming blacktop, that beneath their rakes and shovels and heavy equipment curled and flattened like hot licorice. And when the big man in the machinery moved away, I waited, and I wanted my wheels to be the first to touch that steaming virgin roadway.

 "In the evening twilight, I sat glued to the curb with a Pinky rubber ball in my hand, waiting for my best friend Bobby Duncan to finish his dinner, so we could engage in epic gutter ball tournaments, into midnight. And then later, with scissors, we'd poke holes into the lids of glass Mason jars, and invade the vacant lot across from my grandmother's front porch, to capture our nightly quota of the evening's fireflies, just to leave them twinkling till dawn on our night tables, may they rest in peace. We'd play home free, running from pool of light to pool of light from our neighborhood streetlamps, until we were called in as the neighborhood's porch lights went dark, by my grandmother's voice. And there my sister and I would sleep on opposite sides of the bed, wrapped between hot, sticky sheets, on pre-air conditioning, humid, Jersey summer nights.

 "There were evenings, that if it got hot enough, my dad showed mercy on us, and he'd pack us into the Olds and set off in the darkness, on Route 33, for the 20-mile ride to Manasquan, where — on those nights the heat and the humidity of inland Freehold became too much to bear — we'd sleep in our pajamas, our bed blankets stretched out on the cool sand, enjoying the ocean air of the Manasquan inlet. And then at early light, like magic, we'd be carried back into the house, into our bedroom, sandy-haired from our beach sleep, and I'd watch the sun splash its morning gold over the western wall of my room, and soon I'd smell my mother's coffee drifting up through the floor grate that opened to my room. I'd lie awake and listen to my parents leave for work, and then I'd dress, skip breakfast, walk out onto our side porch, where the bare bones of the sun's rays cut through the green latticework and warmed the wooden steps of our porch. There I'd sit, barely human, a creature of the earth, and the rain, and the sun, and summer."

 As a teenager, I would stay up all night, as a crucible to pass, for three or four nights of the summer, as the house sank into a midsummer's evening silence, I'd be camping out in my room, I'd have my flashlight, I'd have my Japanese transistor AM radio that I was listening to. I would take 2 or 3 a.m.

 walks around the town of Freehold, when the streets were mine! At night and only at night was I king of the streets of Freehold, N.J., unhassled by the day's rednecks. (laughs) Anytime they'd see some long-hair pass the barber shop, they'd come running out with shaving cream half on their face. 'Hey, are you a girl?' (laughs). Ah! Whoah! That was bullshit I didn't need in those days. So in the middle of the evening, I'd return home, 3:30 a.m., I'd arrive into the kitchen, I would build myself an almighty peanut butter and jelly sandwich, pouring it on. I would then retire to my room, to wait for my favorite song to be broadcast by the WMCA good guys.

 Now in my bed, in the summer, I'd be reading all my old copies of Surfing magazine. Did I surf? No. But the magazine held two very essential elements, surf or not. I was deeply interested in the perfectly tanned surfer girl in bikinis, and in the advertisements for Fender guitars. There they were in the fresh ads, the true objects of my desire. Three white Fenders. A bass, a Stratocaster, and a Jaguar, each as white as the Hawaiian sand, lined up next to each other, each more desirable than the next, but taken as a group, my God, the perfect Trifecta. Now I spent relatively short quality time with the pictures of the surfer girls, but I spent hours in my bunk, in my room, salivating over those guitars. I'd drift off to sleep with the magazine open on my chest, and then, riding the summer breeze, from the west, came skipping through my open bedroom window, a sound I swear that was coming from some perfect beach, thousands of miles away."

 Those heartbreak summer songs ... 'Sealed with a Kiss', 'See You in September'ouch! It was the longing, the longing from spring, late school year breakup ... I cheated on a fabulous girlfriend I had, with one of my exes. One of the dumbest things I've ever done! And I immediately had buyer's remorse. That summer, the summer of '67, the summer of Sgt. Pepper, I chased my girl from beach town to beach town to beach town. Thank God, I was aided by a big ol"

'60s ragtop black Cadillac and a car of good friends. My running pack: Jay, Sunrise, Bird. You guys saved my life that summer. I don't know where you are now, but I've never forgotten you, and the solid that you did me in the summer of '67."

 Lana Del Rey is a singer, and a song, that reminds me of the hot, humid, sultry summer nights, and the girls that went with them. Nights so hot and still, fields of fireflies, leaves so still on neighborhood trees that they did not whisper. No rumor of a breeze in sight. You'd sit on the porch. You were dressed, waiting either for her, or the end of the world.

 Well up next is a studio outtake from 1983, of which there are many more, and one of the days, all this work that I did between Nebraska and The River will show up magically. I lived up on Telegraph Hill, on an old 165-acre farm that I rented for $700 a month. I had my '60 'Vette, from the cover of "Born to Run" (the book), and I would take my girl to the Monmouth County Fair, which was a lot of fun, but a funkier proposition in those day. A lot of 4-H farm animals, and there was a car you could bust up with a sledgehammer, for two bucks. Oh, the simple joys. A dunk tank. After the fair, we'd ride back to the farm and put the roof down and sit out in front of the big old white farmhouse, lean back, listen to the music down low. We'd talk and look up at the stars."

 As a teenager, my bedroom window faced south. And we lived on 68 South St. So I got light, but not much sun in the morning. I'd wake, I'd put on my uniform for a '60s midsummer's day. It was a white T-shirt, a pair of washed-out, cut- off blue jeans, slightly stiff with the salt of daily ocean swimming, their legs shredded at the thighs with grains and grains of sand in each pockets.

 And a pair of faded Converse sneakers. Now, I'd just finished and barely survived summer school. And Mr. DiTomasso — along with my Italian cousin Alphonse, Mr. DiTomasso's assistant, and he was a Spanish wiz — now together we had all striven to understand the nuances of español. A musical language as it is, and as musical as I am, unfortunately we remained a hopeless match. Now with Alphonse's sly assistance, I passed.

 "Well, now all I know is the rest of this summer is mine. My mornings, my afternoons, my evenings belonged to me. So I make my way down to the silent morning kitchen, last night's dinner plates shining in their drying holders, compliments of no one, of course, but my mom. There was a $5 bill on the table next to a box of Corn Chex and a bowl. It's her daily summer greeting to me.

 But the five is gonna have to last me all week, and the house is mine for a moment. My pop at work or, having bailed, still in bed, sleeping. My sister still in bed. The house is mind, and I love the quiet. I love the quiet of the house in the morning.

 "So I have a quick bowl of cereal, I scoop up the five, and I'm out the door, striding down South Street towards Route 33. I carry nothing but a folded beach towel under my arm. I made sure not to stick my thumb out until I reach 33, as that would bad-vodoo and jinx my chance of a quick ride east. At the stoplight, I settled into formation at the intersection: Highway 33 and Shore points. Where they meet, I take my hithchiker's stance, one hip slung low, a knee slightly beat, thumb out, an air of nonchalance, like, I could give a shit if you gave me a ride or not. I take the occasional few steps backward towards for my destination, the beaches and bikinis of Manasquan, N.J., and I wait for the magic to begin. Now I'm confident that shortly a bored trucker ... hot-rodder, traveling businessman or concerned mom will pick me up. I'll hear car wheels squeal on gravel, and the passenger side of the door will open and then soon make that beautiful slamming sound of victory in the morning. Small talk will ensue, which you must be good at. And then an hour, three or four rides later, I will be deposited at Manasquan main beach. I will dodge the badge counters. Though it is un-American, in New Jersey we must pay to go to the beach. I do not, however, plan to have my arcade or lunch money eaten up by stinking beach badges. So I head for a plot of sand, I scan thoroughly for the beach cops and the nearest crowd of pretty girls, and I settle in. After a few moments in the sun, I head for my morning baptism in the wonderful, God- given Atlantic Ocean. Summer's on."

 In 1965 Freehold, there were no visible drugs to be seen. The high school principal was still concerned with you hiding out behind the gym, swigging beer. But that started to change around 1967, and one evening, there was the first drug bust that had ever occurred in history, as far as we knew, in Freehold, NJ. And the bass player for The Castiles? Goodbye. The organ player for The Castiles? Goodbye. The drummer for The Castiles? Goodbye. All ripped out of mommy's and daddy's arms, at 3 a.m.

 "I was standing on the corner of Throckmorton and Main, standing guard at my phone booth, waiting for a late night call from my girlfriend. This was one of my permanent positions throughout the years of my high school, as we had no phone at home, and I was there at all hours of the evening and morning, standing with a friend of mine, Bruce Nelson. Bruce Nelson says, 'I just saw Mrs. Bots go by in the cop car with Baby Bots.' Mrs. Botts was Vinnie 'Skeebots' Manniello's better half. I said, 'Get outta here!' He says, 'She was in the the cop car with the Baby Bots, on her way to the police station."

I said, 'Nobody gets arrested with their baby!' But sure enough, the Bots family went down to the police station, victims of the new Freehold Borough war on drugs. So that spelled the final chapter in my first band, the fabulous Castiles, "

 I had a ... painted white Chevy, seat-10, originally aqua blue truck, that my girlfriend had christened Supertruck. I had a three-on-the-tree manual trans, and I had it custom-rigged for drive-in Saturday nights. I had a half-couch that I had picked up off the curb garbage, and I fit it perfectly into the rear bed of the truck, pressed up against the rear window, and I set it in backwards, facing the tailgate. I picked up a cooler and a small hibachi grill, and we would head for the Shore, and in those days, the '70s, you had your choice of three drive-ins in the Shore area. You had the Hazlet Drive-In, you had the Eatontown Drive-In and you had the Shore Drive-in. Now my favorite, because it was where my mom and pop would take us after the beach, the doubleheaders, was the Shore Drive-in, so that's where we'd head, and I would back that truck, backwards into the parking place, with the bed facing the screen, andI would throw the speaker over the side, I would open the cooler, I would warm up that hibachi and pop on a little burger, and I would sit on that couch, with my arm around my girl, in paradise. That summer, we saw a doubleheader, Warren Oates in 'Cockfighter' and Clint Eastwood in 'Fistful of Dollars."

 "There is nothing like the sea at night, when the water is slightly warmer than the air, even though the air is humid after a 95 degree day. God, I love swimming at night. It is all darkness and mystery. It is the void. And it must be done naked. Clothes at the waterline, please. Do this, and my pilgrim, you will become cleansed. Never will the evening air, or a kiss on the beach, or a dry towel, ever feel so good again. The walk to the car will be filled with star-lit grace, and you will never forget it. And once you've hit the water, you will be covered in the blossoming beauty of your youth, no matter how old you are, and whoever you are with, you will always remember them."

 **August 14**

Tonight, we will start with a favorite of mine, as a child: Robert Louis Stevenson. I remember the summer I spent in my grandmother's porch rocking chair, drinking cold lemonade and reading 'The Wizard of Oz' and 'Treasure Island.' Long John Silver, Jim Hawkins, mutiny, treasure maps, pirate ships.

 "The man who brought us 'The Strange Case of Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde' was also a poet. This is a poem of his that's fit for the evening.

 "Now the Land of Nod is mentioned in the Book of Genesis. It is where Cain was exiled by God after Cain had murdered his brother Abel, and Cain went out from the presence of the Lord and dwelt in the Land of Nod on the East of Eden. Nod is the Hebrew root of the verb 'to wander.' Therefore, to dwell in the Land of Nod can mean to be condemned to live a wandering life, I have known a little bit about that life.

 "This is 'The Land of Nod': "From breakfast on through all the day "At home among my friends I stay, "But every night I go abroad "Afar into the land of Nod.

 "All by myself I have to go, "With none to tell me what to do — "All alone beside the streams "And up the mountain-sides of dreams.

 "The strangest things are there for me, "Both things to eat and things to see, "And many frightening sights abroad "Till morning in the land of Nod.

 "Try as I like to find the way, "I never can get back by day, "Nor can remember plain and clear "The curious music that I hear."

 For most of my life, I had no great fondness for the day. I was a born night crawler, up till 3 a.m. as a young child. Daylight hours meant waking too early, schoolwork, and somebody else runnin' my life. But at night, I found my mind came to life. I felt a stimulation, and a creative excitement, a freedom, that eluded me in the day. At night, I felt most like myself.

 "Writing The River, I would rise around 4 p.m. I would crawl into the kitchen, I would eat a bowl of Cheerios, and I would go to work. Now I'd work for three hours, popping rough cassettes into my cassette player, and living and dying over each and every written word. I'd take a 7:30 break to watch the '77 Yankees battle the hated Dodgers until Reggie, Mr. October, launched three consecutive pitches from three different pitchers into the stands, putting one stadium and one small room in Holmdel, N.J., into an uproar. I'd finish my milk and my brownies, my baseball rations, and around 11 p.m., I'd pick my guitar back up. I would head to my workroom/bedroom, go to my desk and work till dawn. During the night, I'd grab anything to eat that would keep me burning, and I would bunk in around 8 a.m. For an entire fall and winter, I led a vampireish existence, barely catching any daylight.

 "All that night was just something that came naturally to me. There was just something I loved about being awake as the straight world slept. It excited me. It sparked my creativity. And it gave me the uninterrupted peace and quiet I needed to work. Occasionally I'd break curfew, just to get out of the house.

 I'd take a 2 or 3 a.m. night drive in my '60 'vette, over the local roads of Monmouth County, the darkness and shadows of the highway at night was where I lived. I was a wandering spirit, barely there, looking briefly into the dimly lit homes, where I could be living any one of a thousand other lives, filled with family, and friends. But I wasn't. For now, the life I chose was here: the life of words, the life of song, the life of these roads, of these evenings. This life. And all it gave and all it withheld, was my life.

 Well, though I had many fine girlfriends, as a young man I was not lucky at love. I was always sure to choose someone with whom it would never work out. I could spot the wrong woman across a crowded dance floor, in a packed club, and be certain before I spoke two words, or looked deeply into a pair of lovely, unsuspecting eyes, that this was never gonna work out. Now, I mean, I didn't know at the time, I just knew it, in my bones or something. Of course I wouldn't figure it out until two or three years into the relationship. But I always suspected I instinctively knew it from the top, and I had it perfected to an art, one completely fine and decent woman after another, at a mostly monogamous two- or three-year interval. I seemed to be incapable of choosing any other than women you could not unlock, women whose hearts remained passionately untouchable, who remained a mystery, even unto themselves. The unknown soul in them always just out of reach. Or maybe that was me."

 All right, the dance floor is empty. The hour is late. I am behind the bar, where I have cashed out, and I have served my last beer. I have announced last call. The bar has been cleaned and cleared, with the exception of two tequilas, 10 feet down the bar from where you are sitting on a corner stool, nursing your last drink. And I am 10 feet on the other side of those two tequilas, not watching the band. Now, in a perfect world, we could meet at these two tequilas. Bottom's up, glasses empty, then let's you and I find something slow and fill that dance floor. On the way to the dance floor, my elbow brushes your elbow gently, my arm slips around your waist, feeling your ribs beneath my right hand. My left hand slips around your wrist and our fingers intertwine, as your arm slowly settles into the middle of my back, with your chin at the top of my chest. And then, your head rests ever so lightly on my shoulder."

 "Now the bar is cleared out, the dance floor is empty, leaving just you and I.

 I head to the back bar, into the manager's office. I grab my jacket. I hit the main light switch. And when I come out, you're sitting in the shadows of the back bar. Now just 50 feet from our dance floor is a side exit. And just 20 feet from that side exit, sitting at the curb, is a '69 Super Sport, your magic chariot. Climb on in. Destination: Unknown."

 Oh, I was persona non grata at my first real girlfriend's house. It was 1965\.

 Maybe it was the hair, my cultivated look of dishevelment, but whatever it was, I was marked as an undesirable by my perfect girlfriend's mother. Now, I was 15, and my gal was a year younger than me, 14. But though a year younger, she had a surprising, burgeoning sexuality that showed me up for being as inexperienced as I was at that age. But I had one thing goin' for me. I was forbidden. I was not to be had. I was not to be touched. And she had a bit of a closeted rebellious streak of her own, so when mom was away, we ventured to mom's bedroom, where she introduced me, for the first time, to what I think was full-on sex, though due to the fog of war, 55 years later, I can't be completely sure. All I remember was she was beautiful, with a softness and a kindness, cut by a streak of cruelty I should have took more notice of.

 "Now in the shadows always lurked a major problem to our paradise. You see, she was solidly middle class. Perfect plaid skirt, blouse with the Peter Pan collar, white socks, long blond tresses. I was a denizen from the far side of nowhere, where Blacks intermingled with whites, where a man never left his house in a suit unless he was going to church or in trouble. Where the firemen, and the truck drivers, and the auto workers gathered around each other's porches on summer nights and passed beers and stories of the week around.

 "Well, her mother could not help but be disappointed in and disapprove of who she thought I was. So the word came down, and she theatrically threatened to get a restraining order that would forbid me from seeing her perfect daughter.

 Now, her perfect daughter had plenty of 'Fuck you, mom' in her, so we began to meet at night, at the Broad Street schoolyard. And there, amongst the empty monkey bars and sliding boards and swings and seesaws, stood an oak tree that became our rendezvous and redemption point. We worked and leaned hard against that oak's trunk on many a summer and fall night, trying to find whatever pleasure and satisfaction we could there. She stole time from mama, girlfriends and homework, to meet me there, but it was always too short and a little painful. But at least she'd come. And we were there together.

 "Then one night she didn't come. Or the next night, either. So I sat on the swings with the rest of the ghosts, dragging my feet through stones and dirt, until 2 a.m. Then I went home. The revolution was over. Whatever use I had been, I was needed no longer. I had engaged the enemy on the field of the battle of love and I had been defeated. Or maybe she just got tired of it all.

 It became too much of a hassle. Well, I finally caught her at her locker in school, one morning, and she tried to be kind, but I wouldn't let her. I wanted to hear her say it was all over. So she said it. I went home, and I decided to rid myself of her, to relieve my heart of her, to release my mind of the burden of thinking of her. It didn't work. I'd see her in my dreams."

 "How do we live beneath the beauty of God's hand? How do we become worthy of the love that he's made possible for us on Earth? And how do we light and carry our own lamp through the darkness? How do we be brave in His name and in our love?"

```
