---
title: "The Truth About Male Friendship"
author: "Sarfraz Manzoor"
source: "The Observer"
date: "2013-01-06"
category: "Essay"
---

What makes a bromance?

In the winter of 1993 I wrote a letter to my closest friend informing him that our friendship had come to an end. I was 22 and had known Amolak since we were both 16; as teenagers we had bonded over music, marriage and money.

We were passionate about music and its capacity to inspire; we were both raised in traditional Asian families and dreaded the prospect of an arranged marriage; and as the children of working-class immigrant parents we hankered after the liberating potential of money. So when Amolak revealed he had landed a plum job at an investment bank within months of graduating I was crushed. I was languishing in low-paid admin work and the news that my friend had leapfrogged over me with his new job was not only depressing on a financial level, but I was also convinced his impending wealth would drive a wedge between us. And so I sat down and wrote a letter detailing why our friendship was ending, how I wished it did not have to be this way and how I wished him well in his cash-drenched future. I sent the letter and assumed it was the end. It was never discussed or even referred to again, and our friendship continued as if nothing had ever changed. We were guys, after all.

I met Amolak in the first week of term at Luton Sixth Form College. It was 1987. I was British Pakistani Muslim and he was a British Indian Sikh; he wore a turban and I was clean shaven; he liked a drink and I was teetotal; he held a postgraduate degree in bullshitting – impressing girls with descriptions of countries he had only visited in the pages of National Geographic – while I was stupidly shy around them. Neither of us was good looking, but only I was burdened by self-awareness. Somehow we got on. He introduced me to the music of Bruce Springsteen, and the Boss was ever-present in our conversations. One thing I found very appealing about Springsteen's songs was that he was as likely to sing about male friendship, about which I knew something, as he was to sing about love, of which I knew nothing at all. "Bobby Jean", Springsteen's song about his friendship with guitarist Steve Van Zandt, summed up Amolak and my friendship, too: "Now we went walking in the rain talking about the pain from the world we hid, now there ain't nobody nowhere no how gonna ever understand me the way you did."

Amolak and I would meet every Saturday afternoon in a cheap restaurant on the second floor of Luton's Arndale Centre and over a shared pot of tea we would talk. There was intense verbal communication between us, but it was largely devoted to finding new and imaginative ways to insult each other. Our conversations would be strewn with random profanity and gratuitous personal insults which often drew in close family members. This was not how I would talk to female friends, but male friendship appears to necessitate couching raw emotions in a cocoon of benign abuse.

In the community where I grew up, male friendship was encouraged but friendship between males and females was not. I could not admit to my parents that I even had female friends, and the idea of openly meeting up with a girl was out of the question. Male friendship was non-threatening and celebrated in both the Indian films which I watched with my family and in the films, television and books which I consumed alone.

The American novelist and essayist Michael Chabon has written about male friendship in his Pulitzer prize-winning The Amazing Adventures of Kavalier and Clay and his latest book Telegraph Avenue, which is set inside an Oakland record store. "For men to really become best friends there has to be an element of adventure", he tells me. "You have to set out to accomplish something and in the course of failing or succeeding you become friends." The mission Amolak and I had agreed on was to make more of our lives than could reasonably be expected of two working-class Asian kids growing up in Luton.

In time we left to study at different universities and I became a writer and Amolak a banker. There was competition but it was not, as I had feared, fatal to our friendship, because it was in different realms. His success was in accumulation – air miles, an American Express black card, personalised number plates – while mine was in experiences: meeting interesting people and going to interesting places. Our lives changed but our friendship remained reassuringly the same. Amolak was, to use a term coined by Geoffrey Greif, author of Buddy System: Understanding Male Friendships, a "must friend". A must friend is someone who is part of the inner circle whom you can confide in and rely on. Greif identifies three further varieties of male friendship: "trust friends" whom you can confide in but aren't part of the inner circle, "rust friends" with whom you are friendly largely because of the length of the friendship, and finally "just friends", who are guys whose company you enjoy but who you have not known long enough or well enough to qualify for the other categories.

Amolak was definitely a must friend, and though I had moved to London and he remained in Luton with his parents we would still meet upstairs at the Arndale Centre, share a pot of tea and conduct conversations laced with good-natured abuse and arcane quotes from spaghetti westerns and the inevitable discussions of the Springsteen concerts we now had the money to attend. Male friendships, according to Greif, tend to be "side by side" – meaning that they involve doing something – rather than the "face to face" friendships women tend to prefer. In my and Amolak's case the activity was seeing Springsteen concerts – we spent our late 20s dodging our families' pleas that we get married by darting around the world seeing concerts. That was where our friendship felt most alive, and that was where it died.

The change came without warning. It was 2003 and we were in New York City; the final night of Springsteen's world tour. The idea of flying to another country to see a concert had lost its novelty – by then it was something we did almost without thinking. My friend and I were now 32; our friendship had, without us realising it, become as ritualised as our Springsteen obsession. Amolak had become a rust friend: all we did was worry about the future and pine for the past. The concert ended and we gave each other a hug. And that was the last time I saw him for six years.

When we returned home something had changed. Phone calls were not returned, emails not read, and I had no idea why. The years floated past and I hardly saw him: I experienced the weird sensation of attending a Springsteen concert alone. When friends asked if we had fallen out I could honestly say no, but when they asked how he was I had to admit I had no idea. Perhaps the friendship had run aground; maybe we had run out of road. The years passed and I grew accustomed to the new reality. It would have been a simple thing to just ask him directly – but that wasn't really our style.

It's sometimes suggested that women get in the way of male friendships, but it was a woman who rescued my friendship with Amolak. During our time apart I had met a woman and fallen in love with her, and she had agreed to marry me.

Bridget wanted me to make more of an effort to contact this friend I had told her so much about, and at her nudging I did. I said I had met "the one" and I wanted him to meet her. Amolak said he, too, had met the love of his life. We arranged a meal: me, Bridget, Amolak and Amanda-Jane.

It should have been uncomfortable, but it was delightful; the previous six years were never mentioned. One of the glories of male friendship is that it is relatively low maintenance: no birthday cards, no Christmas cards, no get well soon cards; no apologies, no explanations and no formalities. But it meant we never talked it out, we never sought "closure" – we just pretended it had never happened. We met a few more times and what I realised was that the separation had been because our friendship had been holding us both back.

Amolak and I had spent so much time complaining about our lives there was little time to do anything about it; the time we could have spent looking for love was spent in each other's company. It wasn't an accident that both of us found love during the hiatus of our friendship. It was only possible without the crutch of friendship.

I got married in August 2010. Amolak did a reading during the ceremony – the lyrics of "If I Should Fall Behind", a Springsteen song – and he made a speech at the dinner. He had married the previous month and by the following year both our wives had given birth: a girl, Laila, for us and a boy, Arjun, for them. The age gap between my daughter and Amolak's son is one month and five days – the precise same age gap which exists between Amolak and me.

We were lucky that we became fathers at around the same time. I happen to know David Baddiel, and I have talked to him about this: he and Frank Skinner have been friends for more than 20 years and the success of Fantasy Football League was partly due to the affection that exists between them. "It can get complicated when only one friend has kids", Baddiel tells me. "For a long time I was the one with children, but Frank recently became a father and it rebooted our friendship – when his partner was about to give birth I took Frank out and gave him, for what it was worth, the benefit of all my wisdom about children, and he later told me that it was a very important moment for him and our friendship." Children drag an old friendship into the vivid present: when Amolak and I used to meet we would sit around and talk about the old days, but now we talk about life right now.

If I met Amolak for the first time today I suspect we would not be friends: I would judge him harshly for being a banker and he would distrust me for working in the media. Our lives are very different: he still lives in Luton and I am in London, he surrounds himself mostly with male friends and most of my friends are female and, of course, he earns yachtloads more money than I could even hope to make. Having a wife who is also my best friend has made me less reliant on friends for emotional support, and yet there is something deeply precious about our friendship. "The older you get the more you appreciate the value of close emotional ties", says Baddiel, who covered this subject in his film The Infidel. "Because your awareness of mortality increases, and so you realise: I need to see this person because I don't know how much longer I've got left."

It is not only an awareness of the finiteness of the road ahead that makes me grateful for my friendship; it is also the knowledge of the miles we travelled together over the past 25 years. These days it is hard for us to meet without our families, but this summer we managed it. It was 14 July, Amolak's birthday and the day Springsteen was playing at Hyde Park. Amolak booked a room at a fancy hotel, and while our wives and babies made use of the pool my friend and I headed to the park. As the music played the years fell away: the writer and the banker became the wide-eyed teenage boys they once were. I remembered our endless conversations about the future: how we weren't going to be like the rest, how we would make more of our lives and do our parents proud, and I remembered how ridiculous it all sounded at the time. In the circles both of us now mingle in it is hard to explain just what it was like back then and that, I realised, is why I cherish my friendship. When we were teenagers our conversations were about our hopes. Today those boys are fathers, but when Amolak and I are together we get very briefly to return to being the people we were in those days before published books and BMWs with personalised plates, before wives and children, when all we had was hope in our hearts and dreams in our heads.
