---
title: "Bruce Springsteen walks with the ghosts -- and the fans -- at the Rose Garden: Review"
author: "The Oregonian"
source: "Ryan White"
date: "2012-11-28"
category: "Concert Review"
---

The night was about "our ghosts", Bruce Springsteen was saying Wednesday. The ghosts of the fallen, the ghosts of places long gone. His ghosts, the E Street Band's ghosts. Our ghosts.

"My City of Ruins", the song he was introducing, was originally written for Asbury Park, N.J. A prayer for strength and better days ahead, it came to be about New York, and the rest of the country, after Sept. 11. In the aftermath of Sandy, it is again about the Jersey shore. Places, and people.

A spotlight fell on the the stage to Springsteen's right during the song, which came six songs into what would stretch to just another 25 26-song, 3 hour, 12 minute flex of all his and the band's many powers.

No longer can they do that, however, without acknowledging those ghosts. The E Street Band's history, its story, is part of the power.

Where once the organ had been occupied by Dan Federici, and that side of the stage had been home to one Clarence "Big Man" Clemons, there was emptiness. Federici died in 2008. Clemons died in 2011. But in that emptiness, there was strength.

We best honor our ghosts by living, right? That's really what the show was about. Life. Being alive. That's why the Rose Garden was nearly sold out, and exuberant, and for once almost -- almost -- as tireless as the star his own bad self.

Opening with "Land of Hope and Dreams" as a sort of invitation, Springsteen and the 16-piece band powering behind him (five horns, three background singers, a percussionist and all your favorites from E Street, minus Patti Scialfa) went to work.

"I'm an old man", the 63-year-old Springsteen said, "but I've got a job to do."

By the third song, "Hungry Heart", Springsteen's shirt was showing hints of the soaking to come, and he was surfing perhaps the slowest crowd wave in the history of crowd surfing, lolling from a riser in the middle of the Rose Garden's floor back to the stage.

By the the seventh song, Springsteen was taking requests. The first came from a over-sized work made up to look a little like Elvis Costello's "Spectacular Spinning Songbook" wheel. After making sure the wheel spun, Springsteen invited a woman in the front row up to spin it. The first try landed on "Pay Me My Money Down", but she tried to quickly move it to "Roulette."

"Spin it again", Springsteen said.

"Uh oh", Springsteen said.

Van Zandt thought about it for a moment and pulled out "Loose Ends", a River- era outtake that made its way to the "Tracks" box set.

Next, a sign asking for "Growing Up" in honor of a 50th birthday. Not only did the guy get his song, but he got to get up and sing it with Springsteen.

Later, the now-regular group of women in "Lesbians (heart) Bruce" T-shirts made it up on stage to dance during "Darlington County."

A couple of girls got to help sing "Waiting on a Sunny Day." A little girl, and a bunch of women who had a sign declaring their desire to dance with Van Zandt were pulled up during "Dancing in the Dark." During the same song, when security saw some fans climbing on the riser in the middle of the floor and went after them, Springsteen urged them to stick with it.

"Don't pay any attention to that guy", he said, pointing at his security detail and laughing. "(Bleep) that guy."

It wasn't enough to walk with the ghosts, Springsteen seemed determined to walk with each person in the arena, too.

And always, just when it seemed it could go totally out of control, Springsteen brought it back. Taking a request for "Seeds", a searing song about desperation, he paused to set it up with "Jack of all Trades", a resolute-in-the-face-of-adversity ballad from his latest record, "Wrecking Ball." Then "Seeds", then a blistering "Johnny 99" that ended with the horns taking over the stage, and the party was on again.

By request, "Drive All Night" made only its seventh full-band appearance since 1981 (if this is right\*), and Jake Clemons, one of two sax players taking the spot of his uncle, well, those solos were goosebump fuel.

The main set ended with the left-right combination of "Badlands" into "Thunder Road." The encore opened with a solo "If I Should Fall Behind" followed by the familiar "One, two!" count-off of "Born To Run." "Rosalita" came out -- followed shortly by Santa Claus, and the night ended with "10th Avenue Freeze- Out", and Springsteen, drenched in sweat and water, first atop Roy Bittan's piano, then back in the middle of the arena leading one last salute to Clemons and Federici, and finally on his knees belting out the final notes.

And by then it seemed like four or five other concerts had passed since Springsteen strummed away at the song "Wrecking Ball", a song that, when it debuted, seemed destined to be a one-off for a football stadium on the other side of the country.

Songs change -- even from when they're recorded. What was once "When all this steel and these stories drift away to rust", is now, "When all this steel and my stories."

Then: "When the game has been decided, and we're burning down the clock."

Now: "When your game has been decided, and you're burning down the clock."

It was personal. Us and him and them and everything we brought with us to the show, the good and the bad. But the bad wasn't any match for the good and the great on Wednesday night.
