---
title: "Excerpt from 'Bruce'"
author: "Peter Ames Carlin"
source: "Bruce"
date: "2013-09-17"
category: "Book Excerpt"
---

During the Eighties, Bruce Springsteen conquered the world on the back of his best-selling album Born in the USA. But as the decade ended, Springsteen found himself at a a personal and professional crossroads. Here he talks about breaking up his musical family - the E Street Band - while embarking on life as a father...

---

On October 18, 1989, Bruce sat down with his address book and a task he'd both feared and fantasised about for most of the decade: breaking up the E Street Band. "I think we got into a rut", he says. "Relationships got a little muddy, through co-dependence, or whatever. Probably that aggravated everyone a little bit. I needed to take a break, do some other things, probably play with some other musicians, which I hadn't done in a long time.

"So I called the guys up and talked to them as best I could. I never looked at it as the band being done or kaput or finished. But it was a call that said, 'I'm gonna do something else, and you're not gonna be a part of it for a while.' And that was very difficult for the guys and me."

The suspicions that drummer Max Weinberg and the others felt at that last show on the two-year, world-conquering Born in the USA tour turned out to be exactly right.

"I just didn't know where to take the band next", Bruce reflects. "It seemed like we'd reached an apex of what we were trying to do and say." Some found it easier to accept than others. Garry Tallent, for one, noticed that absence of finality in what Bruce had to say. "He never said he was breaking up the band", the bassist says. "It seemed like a very nice, gracious call."

Guitarist Nils Lofgren, who had started his sideman career working with the always unpredictable Neil Young, didn't blink. "You gotta understand that this guy had spent his whole life playing with the same seven people", he says. "No matter how good they are, you want to play with other people, try some different things."

Weinberg had seen it coming. "You would have had to be completely blind not to notice there were major changes coming here", he says. But the news was still "unrelentingly depressing".

Clarence Clemons got the call in Japan, where he, along with Lofgren, was touring with Ringo Starr's first All Starr Band. As Clemons remembered, Bruce sounded so casual, he assumed he was being called back to E Street. "I picked up the phone and heard him say, 'Hey, Big Man!' I said, 'Hey, Boss!' And he said, 'Well, it's all over.' I said, 'Oh, uh, OK', because I thought he meant the Ringo tour was over, and I had to come back home to go into the studio or start another tour." The sax player said he'd get home and check in as soon as possible, but then Bruce set him straight. "He said, 'Naw, naw, naw. I'm breaking up the band.' "

Bruce recalls talking to Clemons for a while. "I had the kid gloves on delivering what I knew would be very bad news." But Clemons was juggling his surprise and grief with a sudden urge to reduce his hotel room to ruins. So many years on the road, so much sacrifice, the thousands of hours spent waiting for Bruce to hear just the right sound from the recording studio speakers. "And I'm thinking, 'It's all for this? My whole life dedicated to this band, this situation, this man, and what he believes in, then I'm out of town and I get a f---ing phone call?' "

Fortunately, he was in the company of Ringo Starr, who had experienced his own traumatic break-up when the Beatles imploded in 1970. And it wasn't long before Clemons simply accepted the change for what it was. "Something in the back of my psyche said, 'This is OK. He'll come back. Because anything so great cannot be destroyed altogether. Anything the goddess created can't be thrown away. It'll come back.' "

Then, just before Thanksgiving 1989, Bruce and Patti learnt that she was carrying their first child. A son, Evan James, was born in the evening of July 24. As he watched from the side, a surge of feeling burst against a part of himself Bruce had kept locked down since he was old enough to know how to protect himself.

"I got close to a feeling of a real, pure, unconditional love with all the walls down", he told music writer David Hepworth. "All of a sudden, what was happening was so immense that it just stomped all the fear away for a little while, and I remember feeling overwhelmed. But I also understood why you're so frightened. When that world of love comes rushing in, a world of fear comes in with it."

It was a moment Bruce had imagined, described, and sung about for years. "My music over the last five years has dealt with those almost primitive issues.

It's about somebody walking through that world of fear so that he can live in the world of love."

Bruce and Patti made their bond official at a backyard wedding the next spring, and their daughter, Jessica Rae, was born on December 30, 1991. "I had to change old attitudes and leave a lot of fears behind", Bruce told USA Today's Edna Gundersen in 1995. But he called having a family "the birth of my second life".

Not that he could shake off every shadow. Living in LA, Bruce and Patti were about an hour-long commuter plane ride from the house he'd bought his parents in Belmont, a pleasant suburb about 10 minutes down Highway 101 from San Mateo.

The anger between father and son had largely faded, thanks both to the passage of time and other less expected developments. A stroke Doug suffered in 1979 had somehow rewired the part of his personality that made it all but impossible for him to share his emotions. "Now he couldn't hide anything", Pam Springsteen says. "You could mention any of his kids' names to him, and he'd burst into tears. You could see what meant the most to him. He was just a very real person. No pretence, no persona. And everyone loved him."

When Bruce held his own son in his lap a few years later, Patti noticed that her husband hadn't read a word of the picture book he held. Instead he'd hold up the book so he and Evan could both see it, and then, after a minute or two of silence, turn the page so they could look at the next picture. Patti, puzzled, said. "You're not reading it to him!" Bruce shrugged. "This", he explained, "is how Springsteen men read."

---

Throughout the Born in the U.S.A. tour, Bruce's song introductions and midshow stories focused on a subject he had rarely mentioned in a specific way: sex and romance. Mostly sex, though. Almost entirely sex, now that you mention it.

Introducing "Glory Days", he reminisced about teenage encounters in the bedroom of his parents' house, conducted under the aural cover of balls banging around his pool table. (The occasional sweep of an arm did the trick.) Various tales setting up "Pink Cadillac" made its horndog lyrics all the more vivid, while the introduction to "I'm Goin' Down" traced the arc of a relationship in terms of a couple's sexual patterns. "(First) you're making love to 'em all the time, three or four times a day. Then you come back a little bit later, and uh-oh ... it's like 'Are you gonna make love to me tonight, or are we gonna wait for the full moon again', y'know?" The giggly sex talk got started a few weeks after the tour's start in late June 1984 but took an abrupt leap in late October after a seven-night stand at the Los Angeles Sports Arena. It was not a coincidence.

"I knew people who knew a lot of actors, so I got to know Julianne", says Bruce's tour agent, Barry Bell. "I brought her to a show, introduced her to Bruce. I figured she'd be right for him because she was very down to earth. And the rest is history." A shadowy sort of history, considering what the near future held in store. But given Bruce's steep arc into the apex of global fame, his blossoming romance with an up-and-coming model-turned-actress from the Pacific Northwest inevitably became the subject of intense interest for the world's media/celebrity industrial complex.

Born in Chicago in 1960 and raised in the waterfront suburb of Lake Oswego, Oregon, about ten minutes up the Willamette River from Portland, Julianne grew up with the tree-shaded comfort the Springsteens never enjoyed when Bruce was young. The sixth and final child born to Bill, a prosperous insurance executive, and his homemaker wife, Ann, Julianne went through school with the casual grace of a young woman thoroughly comfortable in her own skin. Fair skinned and blue eyed, with a lissome figure and classic schoolgirl features, Julianne floated through Lake Oswego High School, waving the pom-poms with the cheerleaders on Saturday night and cutting a fine figure in her dad's MG roadster on her way down Macadam Boulevard to downtown Portland. A quick run through the two-year Brooks College in Long Beach, California, prefaced an early-eighties move to New York, where she joined the Elite modeling agency, soon earning top rates as a vision of fresh-scrubbed sensuality. Back in L.A in 1983, Julianne rose quickly through the actress ranks, starting with a featured role in a video by Southern rockers .38 Special, which led to roles in TV movies.

All of which proved entirely beguiling to Bruce, who could also sense Julianne's warmth and lack of Hollywood pretense. That she also knew her way around his favorite rock 'n' roll classics was another bonus. After chatting for a while backstage, Bruce asked to see Julianne again, and when that date went well, they grew closer, then inseparable. "I knew they liked each other, but I didn't know how fast he was moving", Bell says.

Very fast, as it turned out. Bruce took his new girlfriend home to meet his family and friends in New Jersey during his winter break, followed her back to Los Angeles and then went with her to meet the Phillipses when they visited Palm Springs, California, in February 1985. Bruce went to Australia alone in March, but Julianne met him in Japan when the tour got there three weeks later. It was true love and lollipops in the land of the rising sun, and the short holiday they spent in Hawaii on the way back to the United States seemed to seal the deal. "She was just tough", he told Dave Marsh at the time. "She had confidence and resilience, and she wasn't afraid to face facts or their implications."

A day or two after they got home from Hawaii, Julianne called her mother in Lake Oswego and told her they'd better plan a wedding, and soon. And secretly, too. Because if the word leaked to the Bruce-frenzied press, the deluge would be immediate, intense, and unyielding. The ceremony itself was miraculously untouched by the media's fanatic attention, although that feat required a level of cloak-and-daggery (decoy cars, fake schedules, back alley escapes, and more) unseen outside of a James Bond movie.

When it was all over, Bruce had a ring on his finger, a wife by his side, and a commitment to the domestic life he had avoided so assiduously throughout his adult life. It had taken him a long time to get there, but now he was determined to make it work.

Temporarily relieved of the shifting burdens of art, fame, and commerce, Bruce turned his attention to the quieter challenges of domestic life. On one level, he and Julianne were a lot like any other pair of successful young professionals, juggling their relationship with the careers, and the inner lives that had propelled them to the point where they had made themselves family.

Juli was seemingly on board for whatever her husband wanted to do. A night at the Stone Pony? She was right there at the bar, checking out the band with Bruce and then edging away subtly when a crowd of fans enveloped him. When engineer Toby Scott came out to Rumson to help build a recording studio in the guest apartment, they seemed cheerfully settled as any pair of newlyweds.

"They were very domestic. She liked to stay in, make popcorn, watch TV and have some dinner. People kept asking if they had a problem, and I always said no. I thought Bruce and Juli were doing great."

But when they went out for a pleasant dinner with Roy Bittan and his wife, the pianist went home with an uneasy feeling. "It just wasn't like going out with the Julianne and Bruce that I knew", he says. "Juli was a lovely girl, but he just seemed like he was trying to be a different person. I think he was trying to develop a way of being on a social level. And Julianne wasn't anywhere on his train of thought."

...

Both halves of the couple kept news of their breakup as quiet as possible. No press releases, no leaks to friendly reporters, no public heart-to-hearts with "People" or Barbara Walters. Some sharp-eyed observers might have figured out that Bruce had taken off his wedding ring. Backstage crew and visitors noticed that Julianne, a fixture at earlier shows on The Tunnel of Love Express Tour in 1988, was nowhere to be seen, even on the couple's third anniversary on May 13. What could be seen, however, was that the duets he performed with the increasingly prominent Patti Scialfa had grown so steamy it seemed like their portrayal of romantic heat was, perhaps, something a bit too realistic to be limited to the stage. But what might have seemed shocking to outsiders --- is Bruce really fooling around with his backup singer? --- was no surprise to anyone who had seen the Born in the U.S.A. tour from the inside. "What was obvious on the Tunnel tour was also obvious at an early point in the Born in the U.S.A. tour, let's just say that", says Dave Marsh.

Even if the electricity between Bruce and Patti seemed obvious in 1984, the in-house gossip didn't travel beyond the touring party. But even when Julianne became a part of the scene in the fall of 1984, the crowd on the tour always figured her for an outlier candidate for Bruce's real affections. So when the word broke that Bruce would be traveling with a serious girlfriend during the Far East swing in the spring of 1985, some tour members assumed they could book one less hotel room for the band. "I know I was surprised when he came to Japan with someone other than Patti", says Marsh.

Still, when Bruce thought about settling into a serious romance, something pushed him in a different direction. Certainly Julianne's beauty, warmth, and intelligence had magnetic properties all their own. And the prospect of taking up with his newest band member, weaving a romance into the always-complex chemistry of the E Street Band while also stirring up a tabloid frenzy couldn't have seemed appealing. So then came Julianne, the wedding, and three years of marriage that hardly anyone had guessed might be less than the openly affectionate romance most observers believed they were witnessing. When Julianne accompanied Bruce to the early shows on the Tunnel tour in late February and early March, they had impressed some observers with how relaxed and happy they both looked together. But something else was going on too.

Both members of the couple were, and remain, tight lipped about the inner workings, and failure, of their marriage. When pressed now, Bruce has one question: "Did Juli speak to you at all?" Told that she basically hadn't (save for one very brief quote), he speaks only about his ex-wife's strengths and his own weaknesses. "The emotions of mine that were uncovered by trying to have adult life with a partner and make that work uncovered a lot of things I'd avoided and tried not to deal with previously", he says, and more or less leaves it at that.

Julianne returns the favor. "I have always been incredibly private when it comes to my private life", she says. "The one and only thing I will say is that the period was a time of incredible growth and introspection for me. And I will forever give that credit to Bruce." Which is remarkably gracious given how swiftly, and thoughtlessly, Bruce moved into the next stage of his life.

Once Bruce showed up backstage without his wedding ring, he and Patti stopped hiding their affections from the rest of the touring company. They cuddled backstage and shared seats on the jet from one show to the next. Given no official declaration about his separation from Julianne, it came as a shock to Garry Tallent and his girlfriend when they stumbled across the couple smooching on the airplane. "My girlfriend's going, 'What's going on here?' and I had no idea what to say." But the news stayed hush-hush, more or less, through the end of the American tour on May 23 and through the first few dates on the European tour, until the company got to Rome in mid-June.

The sun was bright, the skies deep blue, and the hotel room's balcony all but irresistible when Bruce and Patti woke up on the morning of June 15 and stepped outside to take in the view. With the sun on their shoulders and new love in the air, they held each other as they gazed across the rooftops --- not suspecting an observant photographer, a professional in the land that invented the term paparazzi, was peering at them through his viewfinder. Click-click- click. Then they were lying together, drinks in hand, on a single patio recliner. Clickity-click. Those photos made headlines all across Europe and then in the United States, and on June 17 Jon Landau Management released a statement acknowledging that Bruce and Julianne had separated. A day after that, Bruce and Patti sealed the deal by strolling arm in arm through Paris, in full view of a procession of French reporters and photographers.

"I didn't protect Juli", Bruce says. "Some sort of public announcement would have been fair, but I felt overly concerned about my own privacy. I handled it badly, and I still feel badly about it. It was cruel for people to find out the way they did."