---
title: "Bruce Springsteen: The Man, The Myth, The Magic"
author: "Mark Cooper"
source: "Record Mirror"
date: "1980-10-14"
category: "Concert Review"
---

Note: Published 1980-10-25

MILWAUKEE IS up by the Great Lakes in the industrial badlands. Concrete freeways, steel chimneys, cloudy skies and breweries. The kind of place "where Mister when you're young/They bring you up to do like your Daddy done."

Kids here don't dress. The girls copy movie hairstyles and wear tight jeans and the guys stick to work shirts. This is the Midwest, the industrial heartland and sophistication here is an overlong word that raises eyebrows.

Tonight's the first night of the baseball World Series, the biggest TV draw of the year. It also marks the return of Bruce Springsteen and the E Street Band, the last American rocker, a legend in his own time etc. When Springsteen's not around, there's only Tom Petty, Mink De Ville and Bob Seger who play American rock 'n' roll and none of them play four hour gigs or make such claims to greatness as the Boss. Plus none of them get Clarence Clemons on sax.

Most of the year, kids in Milwaukee survive on a diet of heavy metal, wrongly called rock 'n' roll and originating in style from Britain. Each time Bruce comes back, it's like the rebirth of rock 'n' roll.

Who else speaks for rock 'n' roll and the working man? Paul Simon's too bourgeoise and Randy Newman too dry, and neither of them rock. Springsteen found his subject on his last album and comes close to doing it to death in The River.

The man's in focus and this is one of the first dates of his world tour. Four days ago in this hall, someone threw a bottle and gave one of Black Sabbath three stitches. There was a riot and the gig was cancelled after 10,000 dollars' worth of damage had been done. There's electricity in the air.

The roar that greets Bruce as he hits the stage around eight (no support act) is deafening. After that, the crowd settle down to dancing in their seats and chanting "Bruce. Bruce" in a low keening that resembles a boo and a howl. It's a sign of unrestrained affection.

Springsteen onstage is all American rock, tight black jeans, T shirt and cowboy boots, fifties hair short of a quiff, same hairdresser as James Dean. American rock 'n' rollers become the myths they cherish – look at Tom Waits or Mink De Ville, Springsteen is possessed by an American rock tradition firmly rooted in the fifties – he is its torch bearer and its proud representative. He's the one who turned it into self conscious poetry, mixing Elvis with Dylan.

The new songs from The River make up half of the first half of the show and much of the second. They centre on cars (over 75 references!), women (mostly referred to as "little girl") and working, in that order. They circle obsessively around teenage dreams and adult heartbreaks. His melancholy is the dominant mood of country and western and it's shared by Seger and Simon and all the others. There's nothing sadder than dreams, as every American son knows.

The added subject on The River is marriage, with men and women somewhere between true love and a marriage on the rocks. Haven home becomes a prison as often as not in The River, dreamers are always disappointed.

Onstage, Bruce's every gesture is timed to perfection, sometimes humorous (knees falling under him as he rockabillys across the stage), sometimes sexy, but always on cue and always rock 'n' roll. So rock 'n' roll, that it would seem like play acting if he wasn't possessed, if he didn't convince you that he lived inside the myth that every gesture can be a cool one.

Anyway, Bruce onstage is not alone, he's got a foil – the Big Man, his black brother Clarence Clemens, solid as a rock on the saxophone. They're a classic American double act, Tonto and the Lone Ranger. The best moments of the show come from the interaction of these two.

Together they turn 'I Wanna Marry You' into Mink De Ville meets Sam and Dave. They appear on either side of the stage, belting it out in 'Jungleland', then meeting in the middle. Their triumph is their slyly humorous reading of 'Fire' which they turn into a joke torch song. Bruce sings the lead and Clarence comes on up behind him to end a verse in a bass voice straight out of 'Summertime Blues', which causes them both to freeze right there in a mock shock, it takes them a good minute to unwind from there in slow emotion, a drawn out double take that is pure cool acting and has the crowd on its feet.

Bruce learnt a lot from West Side Story, he never strays from melodrama. There's more than a sprinkling of torch operas in the show and Bruce wrings every drop of emotion from his long narratives, framed in a city roof spotlight. When he flicks a finger in 'Fire' a light pops into his hand. Such is his command that what might appear calculated and precious, posturing and precision, seems like pure myth. Like all the best rock he comes over as absolutely spontaneous.

It's the height of pride to claim the role of redeemer and prophet, to claim succession in the rock 'n' roll tradition. Sometimes Bruce succumbs to the sheer weight of that tradition, rock tunes like 'Sherry Darling' or 'Two Hearts' that come over as exercises in outworn genres. Sometimes he gets too weighty and poetic for his own good, or for basis rock. Bruce's claim is that rock is everlasting, a permanent vocabulary which he just happens to have made poetic.

This is his strength and his weakness. Strength, because he's so firmly rooted that there's nothing personal about him at all, he's pure myth.

Weakness, because of the limitations of that myth. Every teenager ages and becomes "just another part of it." 'The River' is the show's standout, early in the first set, because it asks the question that might destroy Bruce's obsession if answered: "Is a dream a lie if it don't come true/Or is it something worse/that sends me/Down to the river/though I know the river is dry."

Springsteen's emotional core is close to country, and like country, he reveals a soul that is maudlin. His triumph as a performer is his ability to grab and hold a crowd through tearjerkers like 'Wreck On The Highway'. All American songwriters are sentimental philosophers (the popular ones at least), his power is he turns cliches into a tradition through sheer love of it. His joy onstage is contagious and far removed from arrogance.

The sheer generosity of this show was extraordinary, three and a half hours of ballads and street rockers. The E Street Band played their asses off as per normal.

If the subject that Springsteen's made his own seems limited – independence, the darkness, the economy, marriage or whatever – then so's American rock. Limited in a way that's hard for foreigners to understand. The American dream is a single dream and conservative to the core. Rock 'n' roll is only its latest shape.

Bruce's strength is that he understands it so well. And he can prove it all night. The Boss is back, all diamonds and rust.
