---
title: "From Punk Rock to The Big Comebacks"
author: "John Rockwell"
source: "The New York Times"
date: "1976-12-26"
category: "Commentary"
---

It has become fashionable in year-end pop-music roundups of late to lament the state of the art. Pop music isn't what it used to be, we read. It's been another limp year. This observer has never been very sympathetic to such nostalgist defeatism. Of course pop music, along with most manifestations of the youth cultism of the 1960's, has lost some of its more apocalyptic, societally redeeming connotations. Pop music is unabashedly entertainment, now, and perhaps partly as a result the best pop music doesn't speak so compellingly for its times as it used to. But there is still an enormous amount of skill, emotion and charm being invested in the form, and people still legitimately derive great pleasure from It.

That said, 1976 was not a great year, even for 1970's pop. There was nothing of the impact of the 1975 Rolling Stones tour or the first months of Bob Dylan's Rolling Thunder Revue. Most of the trends that continued to prosper had come along earlier-punk rock, disco, salsa, reggae.

Still, in assembling a list of 10 key people, trends, concerts and events, one realizes that, as ever, there was a lot to remember with affection and interest:

1\. Without any doubt the pop-music event of the year was Stevie Wonder's album, "Songs in the Key of Life." in a gratifying instance of the congruence of popular taste and critical opinion, it went straight to the top of the album sales charts and has stayed there ever since. Wonder is the most fecund creator in popular music these days, and a masterly singer and instrumentalist as well. The set has its self-indulgences, but they pale before its achievements and the sheer joy it transmits.

• 2\. Wonder's album followed a 26month-hiatus for him, and hence constituted something of a comeback. 1976 was in fact a year for comebacks. The most dramatic was Laura Nyro's, but Melanie made a welcome new album. John Cale put a band together and Jonathan Richman and the Modem Lovers emerged from years of cultism and confusion with a long-delayed release of some old studio tapes and nearly-as-charming new album. But the best comeback of all was Joni Mitchell's. Not that she had really gone anywhere in terms of fame. But her new "Hejira" album reaffirmed her slightly shaky status as the leading singersongwriter of the day, irrespective of sex.

3\. Another comback of sorts was Paul McCartney's. McCartney had his No. 1 records before his 1976 summer tour, but these were his first performances in this country since the last live Beatles concerts in 1966, and they were remarkably appealing. One says "remarkably" because the music-now available in a three-disk tour albumwas tougher and more convincing than the popsier studio albums. McCartney never did efface memories of the Beatles, and his tour provoked the most intense, wishful rumors yet about an eventual Beatles reunion. But on his own terms, he staked out a convincing claim as the most talented of all the pop-rockers.

• 4\. The most interesting of all the trends one could discern was the growing, world-wide interest in "punk rock." What that really meant was not so much a return to 1950's hoodlumism as a clearing away of "progressive" fussiness and middle-of-the-road bathos and going back to the rhythm-andblues basics at the roots of rock. The most appealing of all the figures to emerge so far in this category was Graham Parker from London. New York's punk-rockers tend to be mixed up with a self-conscious conceptual artiness (Patti Smith, Talking Heads, the Ramones) which has its genuine charms but which sometimes takes the music and the image rather far from punk primitivism. Closer really to the true punk-rock spirit are such midwestern perennials as Bob Seger, who himself made an appealing bid for a nationwide appreciation with a fine live album and an even finer studio album.

5\. A negative development, but one sadly symptomatic of the music business, was the non-happening of Bruce Springsteen in 1976. It would be easy to be cynical and say that the massive publicity Springsteen received in 1975 made it impossible for him to live up to his legend. Maybe it might have, but he never got the chance to try. His live concerts, the few there have been, were as fine as ever, and even gave tantalizing signs of artistic growth. But Springsteen is tied up in a messy legal battle with his manager, and it has curtailed his touring and postponed his crucial new album.

6\. A fascinating phenomenon in 1976 was the continued ability of the public to make stars independently of both the radio stations and the press. Albums would enter the charts, rise to whatever position the artists' previous success might have seemed to entitle them, sit there for awhile, and then erratically rise to the top and stay there, sometimes fading back to the No. 2 or 3 spot and then returning to No. 1\. On a scale just short of No. this happened with such unknown bands as Boston and Heart, More strikingly it happened to both Fleetwood Mac and Peter Frampton, both of whom moved from stardom to huge superstardom, surprising everyone including themselves in the Of the two, the more obviously worthy was Fleetwood Mac, largely because of the bewitching singing of a new member, Stevie Nicks.

7\. The various "new" trends that were meant to supplant or enrich standard white pop and rock in 1976 suffered disparate fates. Reggae, after years of trying, finally made a marked commercial impact on mainstream music, mostly through Bob Marley, who closed out the year dramatically by avoiding what was apparently an assassination attempt in Jamaica and proceeding the next day to go through with a previously scheduled mass outdoor concert there. Disco continued to grow on a commercial level, and began to show signs of stretching beyond the simplistic formulas that have both defined and limited it so far.

Chief among the innovators was Dr. Buzzard's Original Savannah Band, although they haven't been able to translate their success 'into a live show so far.

Salsa, on the other hand, shows every sign of remaining a music of the barrio, although here-as in the past-Latin music has been able with more accessible forms of jazz, rock and pop.

8\. On the concert front there were two particularly rewarding evenings. In January, shortly after Harold Melvin and the Blue Notes broke up, the two factions appeared in head-to-head confrontation in New York. At the Felt Forum were Melvin and some remaining Blue Notes. Over at Radio City Music Hall Theodore Pendergrass, the group's former lead singer, appeared with the other Blue Notes. Pendergrass won the war hands down, and one hopes he manages to get a solo career underway soon.

• 9\. The most striking and, in a sense, unexpected success was David Bowie's Nassau Coliseum concert (those who saw the same show a few days later at Madison Square Garden said it wasn't so effective there). Bowie always has been so artful and self-absorbed that his performances have seemed stilted.

But on Long Island it all came together for him and the cold, white intensity of the night will long be remembered.

10\. Events that aren't themselves specifically musical still reflect back on to the music. In New York the Schaefer Festival managed•to struggle on for another season of summer concerts in Central Park, although once again the prospects for the' future look clouded. The principal venue in Manhattan for concerts in the 3,000-seat class flip-flopped back downtown again to 14th Street, with the Academy of Music now renamed the Palladium. This made little difference to what music we hear, although Ron Delseneri the Schaefer and Palladium promoter", has managed to clean up the 14th Street theater in a healthy manner. But the biggest non-musical event of theyear was tl e news that Rollin Stine magazine plans to switch its headquarters to New York early in 1977. Nattt-' rally, it's hard to measure the impact of such matters, and of course for allof Jann Wenner's capabilities, Rolling Stone is hardly the only outlet for rock writing around. Still, it makes a nice; symbol of New York's continued vitalw ity and centricity in the pop-music.