---
title: "Bruce Springsteen: The Last American Hero"
author: "Sandy Robertson"
source: "Sounds"
date: "1980-01-05"
category: "Commentary"
---

MUST BE some new kind of drug or somethin', 'cos even a 16-year-old don't do a graveyard shift of four hours and then dance on the piano, let alone some old reprobate who only just ditched that scrubby face fuzz, y'know, some New Jersey geezer who I'd always thought of as an amped-up folksinger with funky sneakers and a sloppy line in self-mythologising.

But, and here my heart conceded utterly, those moonlighting compadres back at the Jap hotel with their beer-bellies and tetracycline and jockey shorts had told the truth when they'd encouraged me to act the low hoodlum and spend a weekend of discomfort, one guy checked in and the other four interlopers surreptitiously on the floor after hours, slugging rootbeer and sharing damp Chinese cheeseburgers from the dive across the street. "You havta see the guy to understand".

Eyeballing the battered bootleg before me (so many people have borrowed it) I remember the drizzle in the San Francisco night. God, did I feel bad, think it was the 'flu or maybe even an unknown disease, stiff neck and throbbing temples, exacerbated by interruption of sleep when the doped-out potheads had to get back into the hotel room at 3 am after chatting up the black girls down the hall. December 1978 at the Winterland was the scene of two of the best gigs I've ever witnessed, in spite of the necessity of having to stand amid masses of swaying hippies and clouds of intoxicating smoke if you wanted to see anything. Bruce Springsteen And The E Street Band; who else would they make a triple album bootleg of? Who else would have two biographies written on him after only four official record releases? I found out why they call him 'The Boss'.

I NEVER needed another Bob Dylan, not having had much time for the first one, so when I started copping eyefuls of all these Zimmerman comparisons, circa '73 when Greetings From Asbury Park NJ was released, I was more than a little dubious about Bruce Springsteen. Until I decided to write this piece, I'd never actually sat down and listened to the thing all the way through, but I find it was worth the effort. Some fellow squat-dweller in my poverty period of two years ago used to bombard the cracked plaster near Ladbroke Grove with any Loose Windscreen he could find, but all I could hear in my punk rock haze was a guy with a moan for a voice bumbling on in a very un-rock'n'roll fashion about 'Madman drummers bummers/and Indians in the Summer/With a teenage diplomat', and getting nowhere fast. It seemed like another case of sensory overload, a shabby Catholic boy learns how to make a song read like a rhyming dictionary and thinks he's seen God. 'Blinded By The Light'? I wasn't buying.

Of course, I couldn't have known the problems that the blaze and noise boy was going through at the time. Springsteen grew up in Freehold, New Jersey, son of Adele and Douglas Springsteen, a sporadic interest in rock'n'roll blossoming into his tenures with The Castiles, a pop/rock outfit, and later Steel Mill, an almost-success of a heavy metal nature. Following that, he tried to assemble a larger band with horns and so on, but when that didn't work out he decided to go solo. When the fledgling genius was introduced to a couple of music biz hustlers named Mike Apel and Jim Cretecos, they freaked. In their eyes a star was born, so in early '72 the abrasive Appel managed to secure Springsteen an audition with John Hammond at CBS, the man who had signed Dylan to the label. Hammond inked the lad, in spite of manager Appel apparently being incredibly abusive to him before he'd ever been allowed to hear two bars of Springsteen's music. Then-supremo Clive Davis was in agreement, it was a green light situation.

Springsteen roped in a bunch of old sidekicks from burnt-out beach-town Asbury, and the album was waxed in three weeks at 914 Sound Studios, an allegedly inadequate facility owned by MOR producer Brooks Arthur. Trouble was old Bruce didn't even know what a producer was at this point, and Appel and Cretecos were doing the honours with their eye on some upbeat folk market of their own imagining. Rock'n'roll was shouted down, resulting in a thin sound and an unsatisfying record. Still, in retrospect 'Blinded By The Light' and 'Growin' Up' are fine songs, if overly verbose, though the stereo must be cranked up to eviction level before one gets the message.

CBS amplified the Dylan connection and it backfired. Then, oblivious to the need to let the boy rock'n'roll in context, they put him out as support on a tour with Chicago. That didn't do anybody any good, so from then on Springsteen only did shows on his own, which proved difficult to arrange for an unknown act. The loudmouthed Appel gave everybody at CBS a hard time, which made people in the company pissed off with the whole ball game. It was second LP time.

The Wild, The Innocent And The E Street Shuffle was recorded under virtually the same conditions as the first disc, with mostly the same musos. It got many rave reviews, as did the live Springsteen shows, but flopped miserably. A lot of folks in the know thought that Bruce would be dropped by CBS, especially since Clive Davis had just been ousted as top man. Springsteen was a contender for the last-year's-thing award. But nobody'd reckoned with the power of the press.

GENERALLY, in America rock journalists don't mean shit. Jon Landau is one of the few exceptions, the most respected writer in the industry; when he was a full-time critic what was said was released. He also produced some sterliing stuff, including the MC5 classic album, Back In The USA. On his 27th birthday Landau saw his second Bruce Springsteen show, in Boston-Cambridge, one of Bruce's areas of high popularity. He went home and wrote a eulogy that was to become as legendary as its subject. Feeling older and unwell, Landau talked in his piece for The Real Paper (a Boston rag) of his disillusionment with music. "But tonight there is someone I can write of the way I used to write, without reservations of any kind. Last Thursday at Harvard Square Theatre, I saw my rock and roll past flash before my eyes. And I saw something else: I saw rock and roll future and its name is Bruce Springsteen".

Perhaps the greatest quote of all time, certainly the most remembered, in rock crit terms. CBS used it in ads, got enthusiastic, other critics joined in. It was now nearly a year since the second LP and there was a lot of pressure on Springsteen to at last come up with the goods on record. He'd lost his drummer, Boom Carter (who himself had replaced Vini Lopez) and keyboard-player David Sancious. A newspaper ad brought replacements Roy Bittan on piano and Max Weinberg on drums. Eventually, The Wild, The Innocent And The E Street Shuffle had done OK, but a new record was needed. Born To Run it was called, and its creation turned out to be an agony for everyone concerned.

Springsteen was incredibly indecisive in the studio, labouring over every detail in an attempt to get it right at last, trying every variation possible on each song. Sessions were moved from 914 Sound to the Record Plant, and Landau was called in to co-produce. During the sessions, Miami Steve Van Zandt from Southside Johnny And The Asbury Jukes was added as guitar player after he solved a particularly difficult problem regarding how a horn part should be arranged. When Born To Run was issued in October '75 it was two years since the world had heard from Springsteen.

Nobody was disappointed. At last the New Jersey kid had made a rock'n'roll album that approached the magnificence of the live shows, one which honed the power of his convoluted verbals to make them all the more striking. Springsteen's fantasy vision of an American suburbia full of alienated, near- beaten souls trying for that one make-or-break last chance at heroism (in a sense paralleled by the man's own career at this point) has never been more succinctly stated than in the song 'Born To Run' itself.

It seems that wordsmith Landau provided Springsteen with an editorial function, though the title track, ironically, would appear to be the one thing on the record that Landau didn't work on. It's undoubtedly Springsteen's best known tune; some have criticised it as being muddy, but it's four-and-a-half minutes that feels like 30 seconds, surely the mark of greatness. An insanely simple but hauntingly effective guitar riff is not quite drowned in an explosion of Spectorish drums (Boom Carter's only, I think, recorded work with the band) and surging keyboard. It's the song that ties all the elements together, the obsession with cars, for instance. 'At night we ride through mansions of glory in suicide machines', he states. Even back in 'Growin' Up', when describing what sounds like some naive psychedelic experience, he wryly assured us that she swears he 'found the key to the universe in the engine of an old parked car'.

Who else bar Roger Christian could see truth in a fuel-injection system? Otherwise, the song is a delirious synthesis of every trashy noise (and every mangificent one, too) that the adolescent Springsteen must've heard on his radio. What finally makes it is the passion with which it's sung. Springsteen was the first artist in umpteen years to sound as if he actually cared about something. When he roars 'I'll love you with all the madness in my soul', you believe he's talking about something real.

So it did very well, and so did the tour. The phenomenon found himself on the covers of Time and Newsweek on the same day. He came to England and played at Hammersmith, but CBS went over the top with posters stating that 'At Last London Is Ready For Bruce Springsteen', which Bruce hated so much that he spent some time tearing them down. Under one ad some wag inscribed the words "if not, CBS has blown the entire year's promo budget". Worldwide, detractors screamed "hype". Overall, the tour had been successful, but it had lost some money because Springsteen didn't want to play stadiums. And there were other problems.

SPRINGSTEEN had originally signed his contract with Laurel Canyon, Mike Appel's company, on the hood of a car in a dark parking lot in New Jersey, without even reading it. The contract was iniquitous in the extreme and Appel tried to renegotiate it before it was up, offering as inducement to give Springsteen half of a 500,000 dollar advance he'd gotten from CBS. To make it worse, Springsteen found that he didn't own the rights to his own songs and that he was in a rather dire position fianancially to boot. After much wrangling things went to court.

There were two distinct problems. In July 76 Springsteen filed suit in Federal court alleging fraud, breach of trust and undue influence. Two days later, Appel filed suit in Supreme court in an attempt to prevent Springsteen recording with Landau. The details of the claims and counter claims could almost fill a book (see Dave Marsh's 90% excellent Bom To Run, don't see Peter Gambaccini's 100% awful quicky tome), but after months a settlement was reached out of court. Bruce got his songs and Appel got money. Landau and Springsteen began recording Darkness On The Edge Of Town in June '77. It took a year to finish, for the ususal Springsteen reasons. He even delayed it because the colour of the sleeve photo wasn't to his liking.

Well I recall listening to a tape of Darkness smuggled out of the pressing plant days before its release, people crowding round a stereo somewhere in Hollywood. Springsteen's concerns hadn't changed, but they'd lost all vestiges of fantasy. On songs like 'Badlands' and 'Racing In The Street' he was dealing with the reality of life rather than some idealised method of escape. In 'Prove It All Night' he sings '...if dreams came true, oh, wouldn't that be nice/But this ain't no dream we're living through tonight/Girl, you want it, you take it, you pay the price'.

I still had to see those two shows in December of last year before I got the message. Springsteen gives songs to others that sound like oldies ('Because The Night' to Patti Smith, 'Hearts Of Stone' to Southside, 'Fire' to Robert Gordon, 'Don't Look Back' to The Knack) and plays oldies like 'Devil With The Blue Dress' and 'Rave On' as if they were his own. As Weinberg and bassist Garry Tallent underpin the package, Bittan's piano decorates like the fairy lights round the stage on 'Santa Claus Is Coming To Town', while Van Zandt and organist Danny Federici flesh out the bones. Accomplished musicians, yes, but they never sound bored.

Against this backdrop, Springsteen plays guitar like his beloved Dick Dale(!), his prowess on that instrument, in terms of insanely emotional ferocity, being something he's never been given much credit for. He runs around the stage, colliding with gigantic (or so he appears) sax player Clarence Clemons, telling stories. It's rock'n'roll as theatre, but it's done without benefit of smoke bombs or tedious special effects.

It becomes immediately obvious upon seeing this man perform why he appeals to oldsters, punks, indeed to anybody who ever loved rock'n'roll for any of the right reasons. At the end of his set he's dancing on that piano, like Elvis in Jailhouse Rock. Of course, the fragmentation of the industry bazaar has ensured that there'll never be another Elvis; to be that you'd need to be able to appease fans of ELP, Sex Pistols and James Taylor. But Springsteen is still the inheritor of the Elvis tradition, if perhaps a little sadder and wiser. In his book Elvis 56: In The Beginning Alfred Wertheimer says: "Others had an act. Elvis had revelations. He had true emotion".

THE ONLY revolution that rock might win for anybody is a personal one. Bruce Springsteen, helping the no-nuke mob aside, still has the odd problem in his own backyard to tidy up. During one of the MUSE concerts, he got into a fight with ex-girlfriend, photographer Lynn Goldsmith. He was supposed to be issuing an album before Christmas 1979 and playing the L.A. Forum on New Year's Eve. Now it looks like he's doing neither.

With all the anguish, it's surely been worth it; for him, for us. As he told Creem magazine: "Rock and roll came to my house where there seemed to be no way out...snuck in, ya know, and opened up a whole world of possibilities. Ideally if any stuff I do could ever do that for somebody, that's the best. Can't do anything better than that. Rock and roll motivates. It's the big, gigantic motivator...that's what I think you gotta remain true to. That idea, that feeling."

If it's hard to be a saint in the city, which it surely is, at least Bruce Springsteen is still out there trying.

© Sandy Robertson, 1980