---
title: "Still the Boss"
author: "Burehan Wazir"
source: "The Observer"
date: "2002-10-27"
category: "Commentary"
---

Tonight, in the wake of a successful album reflecting US anguish over 11 September, the voice of blue-collar America brings his dynamic stage presence and anthems to working men and women to a sold-out Wembley Arena

At the end of 'My City of Ruins', a song that concludes Bruce Springsteen's latest album, the songwriter surrenders himself to a religious passion. As his formidable backing group, the E Street Band, chants the line 'With these hands', Springsteen sings for a spiritual rebirth in the wake of the war on terror: 'I pray Lord/I pray for the strength Lord/I pray for the faith Lord/I pray for your love Lord/'.

The song - originally written about the economic blight in the singer's home town of Asbury Park - has taken on an anthem-like quality in light of the 11 September attacks.

'People see that song as something that encapsulates the American experience in the wake of the attacks', Nils Lofgren, a guitarist and long-serving member of Springsteen's E Street Band, told The Observer recently. 'To me, Bruce says all the things being thought by the average guy on the street."

This everyman aspect of Springsteen's music best describes his ongoing appeal to his audience. For more than 30 years through 12 records, 'The Boss' - he hates the title - has written cinematic songs on a human scale about pinched dreams, broken hearts, crushed souls and dead-end jobs. His characters are refugees of the rock 'n' roll generation. They run from their adult responsibilities, luck out with bad choices and finally return to embrace their fates. In near hymnal terms, Springsteen articulates the importance of community, personal loss and finally, redemption.

Released in July, Springsteen's latest album, The Rising, has been received as a CD born of his need to testify to the pain of those who were killed or wounded on 9/11. It also marks, for the first time in 18 years, his floor- shaking return to the big band sound that first cemented his reputation. The Rising , however, is more than just a repeat of old glories. It is arguably the most articulate response yet by a major recording artist to the events of 9/11.

It will not be the first time that Bruce Springsteen has taken up the mantle of blue-collar hero. As he performs tonight at a sold-out Wembley Arena with the E Street Band, Springsteen and his bandmates will provide an example of those most valued baby-boomer tenets: enduring friendship, love and the power of rock 'n' roll. As he said once, 'This music is forever for me. It's the stage thing. That rush moment that you live for. It never lasts, but that's what you live for."

Bruse Springsteen was born on 23 September 1949, one of three children. He was raised in the working-class town of Freehold, New Jersey. The family struggled with odd jobs to pay the bills. Springsteen would later say he was acting out his father's 'revenge' on the system. School was 'the big hate' and the young Springsteen was an habitual truant.

It was the early Sixties in New Jersey, and the era of 'doo-wop' music, drag races and leather gangs. Like many teenagers of his generation, Springsteen found an escape in rock 'n' roll and started playing the guitar. 'Nothing hit me until I was about 14', he said once. 'And when it did, it hit me completely, took over my whole life. Everything from then on revolved around music. Everything."

Guitar playing was his first love. And the silent, insecure boy excelled at it. After failing to break New York's burgeoning folk scene, he had brief stints with New Jersey groups such as the Rogues and Dr Zoom and the Sonic Boom. Eventually he established his own group, the E Street Band.

Springsteen was signed to Columbia Records as the 'New Dylan' in 1972 after an audition with John Hammond, the A&R man who had brought Dylan to the label. In Hammond's office, as Springsteen finished up 'If I Were The Priest' - a song in which the Virgin Mary runs a whorehouse in the American West and Jesus appears as a customer - Hammond burst into excited laughter. 'That's the damnedest song I've ever heard', he said.

His first record, in 1973, Greetings from Asbury Park, NJ, sold poorly despite the unprecedented hype that accompanied its release. As his career trajectory has demonstrated, Springsteen's fame has been inexorably linked to his concerts. His reputation as a live entertainer - both then and now - is unparalleled. He often wanders off into long and shy monologues during his concerts. His blue-collar sentiments only add to his reputation. Rock critic Jon Landau wrote after one performance in 1974: 'I saw my rock 'n' roll past flash before my eyes. And I saw something else: I saw rock 'n' roll future and its name is Bruce Springsteen. And on a night when I needed to feel young, he made me feel like I was hearing music for the very first time.' Landau offered to manage him and the relationship lasts to this day.

The heavy round of gigs that followed were to pay off eventually.

Springsteen's third effort, 1975's Born to Run, hit commercial paydirt. The album seemed to perfectly embody the epic and musically momentous three-hour concerts on which Springsteen and the E Street Band had built their reputation.

Writing in the influential rock magazine Rolling Stone in 1975, critic Greil Marcus confirmed the singer's status in the canon of rock 'n' roll artists: 'Springsteen took what he found and made something better himself. This album is it."

The following three years were to see his career on hold, however, after a management dispute. He returned with the critically-acclaimed Darkness on the Edge of Town, The River and Nebraska albums. Springsteen seemed to be looking to expand his musical horizons, journeying back and forth from the realms of folk and rock music. It was also around this time, he has said, that he discovered his left-leaning politics.

Few, including the songwriter himself, could have predicted the importance of Springsteen's next record. Released in 1984, Born in the USA established him as the most dynamic American songwriter since Bob Dylan. For most of his fans, it stands as his musical apogee. The songs suggested a shrinking American landscape. Springsteen narrated stories of disillusioned Vietnam veterans, the destruction of small-town American life and the simple pleasures of the working man. Born in the USA immediately resonated with a country reeling from welfare cuts and unemployment. To date it has sold more than 20 million copies.

With Born in the USA, Springsteen ushered in the age of the stadium concert and MTV. He was elevated to the position of rock royalty. But the demands of the stadium circuit eventually took their toll. Tired and emotionally drained by the rigours of the road, he shelved the E Street Band and returned in 1987 with Tunnel of Love. It was a subdued record and a stark contrast to the bombastic Born in the USA. The album explored the failures of his domestic life - his relationship with his wife, the actress and model Julianne Phillips, was fast deteriorating. They divorced in 1989.

While the 1980s were undoubtedly Springsteen's commercial heyday, the following decade was muted. 'The Nineties', Springsteen told Rolling Stone, 'were about getting my own house in order.' He married his backing singer Patty Scialfa in 1991. He also moved to Los Angeles - far from his working- class roots. The switch to the centre of the entertainment industry seemed at odds with his personality. And the newly-found domestic bliss seemed to mark a decade of unchallenging statements.

His 1992 double set, Human Touch and Lucky Town, were erratic affairs. It was as if the moneyed climate of Los Angeles had robbed his music of its authentic spirit. He wasn't alone in suffering from a downturn in sales. Many of his musical contemporaries were struggling to find their feet in a market dominated by younger acts. Only 1995's Ghost of Tom Joad - a faithful reworking of John Steinbeck's Grapes of Wrath - indicated that the old blue- collar ethic was intact. But while the album was a critical success, it sold poorly.

The musically-barren decade did not diminish his status as the ordained voice of his generation, however. On the campaign trail in 1992, Bill Clinton admitted he was a fan. And earlier this year, a group of political activists launched a campaign to persuade the singer to run for the US Senate.

Springsteen was appalled: 'If nominated, I will not run. If elected, I will not serve."

The runaway success of his latest album reinforces the theory that Springsteen hits his musical peaks in periods of tumult. Few events have so inspired him as those of 9/11. Springsteen immediately went into the studio with the E Street Band, which he had recalled for a tour in 1999\. The new album, The Rising, has been hailed as his most potent statement in years.

As he prepares to play the new songs in London tonight, his music will serve as a reminder of rock 'n' roll's resilience in the face of sweeping demographic changes in the pop charts. Springsteen has rediscovered the honesty in embracing and articulating human tragedies. His new songs are, in part, a celebration of his generation's survival. As he sang 25 years ago, 'It ain't no sin to be glad you're alive'.