---
title: "Chaos in the family, chaos in the State"
author: "Kevin Williamson"
source: "National Review"
date: "2016-03-18"
category: "Commentary"
---

Michael Brendan Dougherty is bitter. I think that I can write that in both truth and charity. (I think you might even say that he and I are friends.) Dougherty is a conservative of the sort sometimes advertised as "paleo" and served as national correspondent for The American Conservative. Like many conservative writers with those associations, Dougherty spends a great deal of time lambasting the conservative movement and its organs, from which he feels, for whatever reason, estranged --- an alienation that carries with it more than a little to suggest that it is somewhat personal.

In 2013, he announced that he planned to set aside political writing to concentrate on the relatively sane world of professional baseball, saying: "National politics has most of the vices of 'bread and circuses.' And if that's the case, pro sports is a better circus." But it is difficult for a politics man to give up politics --- look at all the political crap that ESPN viewers and Sports Illustrated readers have to endure --- and he has taken it upon himself in this election cycle to serve as Apostle to the Cathedral, "the Cathedral" being a favorite metaphor of the so-called alt-right for the "distributed conspiracy" (in the words of Curtis Yarvin, a.k.a. Mencius Moldbug) that might in less riled-up times be described as "polite society"the conventional wisdom among people who live in places such as Washington, D.C., and New York City and work in fields such as politics and media.

It is immoral because it perpetuates a lie: that the white working class that finds itself attracted to Trump has been victimized by outside forces. It hasn't. The white middle class may like the idea of Trump as a giant pulsing humanoid middle finger held up in the face of the Cathedral, they may sing hymns to Trump the destroyer and whisper darkly about "globalists" and --- odious, stupid term --- "the Establishment", but nobody did this to them. They failed themselves. If you spend time in hardscrabble, white upstate New York, or eastern Kentucky, or my own native West Texas, and you take an honest look at the welfare dependency, the drug and alcohol addiction, the family anarchy --- which is to say, the whelping of human children with all the respect and wisdom of a stray dog --- you will come to an awful realization. It wasn't Beijing. It wasn't even Washington, as bad as Washington can be. It wasn't immigrants from Mexico, excessive and problematic as our current immigration levels are. It wasn't any of that. Nothing happened to them. There wasn't some awful disaster. There wasn't a war or a famine or a plague or a foreign occupation. Even the economic changes of the past few decades do very little to explain the dysfunction and negligence --- and the incomprehensible malice --- of poor white America. So the gypsum business in Garbutt ain't what it used to be. There is more to life in the 21st century than wallboard and cheap sentimentality about how the Man closed the factories down. The truth about these dysfunctional, downscale communities is that they deserve to die.

Economically, they are negative assets. Morally, they are indefensible.

**Forget all your cheap theatrical Bruce Springsteen crap.** Forget your sanctimony about struggling Rust Belt factory towns and your conspiracy theories about the wily Orientals stealing our jobs. Forget your goddamned gypsum, and, if he has a problem with that, forget Ed Burke, too. The white American underclass is in thrall to a vicious, selfish culture whose main products are misery and used heroin needles. Donald Trump's speeches make them feel good. So does OxyContin. What they need isn't analgesics, literal or political. They need real opportunity, which means that they need real change, which means that they need U-Haul.