---
title: "Out In The Street: Bruce Springsteen, Tom Petty and the simple truths of blue-collar rock"
author: "Cynthia Rose"
source: "The History of Rock"
date: "1984-01-01"
category: "Opinion"
---

In the heyday of Elvis, Chuck Berry or the Beatles, radio was revered. It constituted rock'n'roll's channel to the teen heart, and it struck out into the very soul of a sprawling America. Radio could reach everywhere, from the rural outlands to the inner city. Radio exposure primed the juke-boxes of diners, soda fountains and truck stops. And it was rock'n'roll radio that baptised the ears of the first folks who asserted in print that music could matter, as well as entertain.

In the Eighties, however, those same commentators bemoaned a supposition that radio success spelled mediocrity, banality, formulae, a mightily increased dose of plain old bribery. There was also the question of fashion. Critics have traditionally tended to disapprove of music that gained mass radio success, since they must thereby relinquish the privilege of introducing people to it. But the equation of large-scale success with a lowest common denominator has become all but entrenched in printed evaluations of music. And this prejudice was a prime factor in the creation of 'blue-collar rock'.

**Collars and dollars**

'Blue-collar rock' is a critical term disseminated by various rock critics who possess 'white-collar' credentials and experience. It was coined to deal with a number of American artists who were selling solidly, and had achieved somewhat heroic stature, all with 'traditional' rock songs whose lyrics featured girls, cars, rebellion and the radio. The radio provided platinum hits for three such performers — Bruce Springsteen, Tom Petty and Bob Seger.

Several supposed similarities linked these artists. They lacked 'proper' (white-collar) educations. Their smarts were street smarts, their language limited to that of the truck stop, shopping mall or suburban housing tract.

They were rough and ready rockers in the guise of people's heroes — spokesmen and role models for the little guy and his girl.

It is a glib assessment at best, but one that often proceeds from an educational viewpoint which is far more cerebral and far less a matter of practical, direct experience than that which is common to the 'blue-collar rockers' themselves. With a few notable exceptions, the rock writer tends to have a college degree and is not likely to be the son or daughter of an assembly-line worker, waitress or small-town, small-time businessman.

Rock'n'roll, by contrast, has always renewed its vigour from raw (black) America and neither 'education' nor 'culture' has contributed much to its cyclical evolution. Its greatest pioneers have not been thinkers but poets.

Traditionally, self-expression has been the poor American's religion and his passport to Somewhere.

Springsteen's Dad earned his living in a plastics factory, as a bus driver and a prison guard; Tom Petty's father (now a widower) is a disabled, retired insurance salesman. Neither endorsed their sons' attempts to escape by mastering the magic that radio had filtered into their younger lives. Yet it was to the promises beamed out by the radio that these white Americans pledged their allegiance. They remain defenders of the faith, committed to the original populism and dream of unity they recognized in the music of their youth.

"In America", Tom Petty commented in the Eighties, "the press still don't sell records — records sell because of the radio. And today it's real sick about what they call AOR radio — they just won't play black music. I mean, old Jimi Hendrix maybe, but they seem to think if they play Marvin Gaye people ain't gonna listen, it's gonna wreck their ratings... it's getting so limited and you only hear one sound, loud-guitars, pretty formulated. We've tried to ignore it but even any of our stuff with a funkier sound they won't touch.

"But I prefer the idea of buying a record because I've heard and liked it", he asserts firmly, "rather than because somebody told me to buy it. You know, kids may go nuts over Bruce or nuts over us but it's all the same old music, the music's always been there. We grew up hearin' all these classic American musics, and our basic theory is just to take these sounds and keep on mixing 'em up and pouring 'em out and each time get a different stew.

"What I heard in the Drifters, in all that great radio music", Bruce Springsteen says, "was the promise of something else. Not a politician's promise, y'know, that everything is gonna be alright ... that would be a false promise anyway. I mean the promise of possibilities: the promise that the search and the struggle matter, that they affirm your life. That was the original spirit of rock'n'roll. And that's what I hope we carry on, a message that no one, nothing has the right to tell you you gotta forfeit your hopes and your dreams."

**Love and marriage**

Petty has always couched the majority of his music in the love-song format ("it's the easiest for hooking someone in"). He has also been married for five years ("I have a good marriage now and, believe me, I haven't always") and has two children. Marriage — 'the ties that bind' — is a theme Sprigsteen felt ready to face only on The River (1980). "When I was writing the early songs", he demurs, "the girl was still a part of it, she was just part of the future.

But she was always there, that was always there, because it's simply a basic human need".

"There's a hunger for that relationship", he will say, shaking his head. "But my characters, they're wrestling with the fact that it's so hard now to separate traditions of love and possession, romance and relationships, from the realities of those things today. It's a puzzle to me, because the desire to become truly involved is as strong as anything about freedom. It's a basic reality of how people are."

Neither Petty nor Springsteen has ever cared to be more fashionable, more educated, more 'influential' outside the rock'n'roll arena. The primary attentions of each have gone to their music, their bands, their fans — and the battle to, as Petty puts it, "evolve your own art, which is the thing you always have to do, painful or not". Each has weathered extended legal battles to ensure maximum personal control of that evolution; just as each has endured performing and recording layoffs as a result.

All this occurred, however, at a time when rock was no longer a revolution but a distraction and a diversion. It was also a time when economic stress placed the radio listener's life at the furthest possible remove from that of the 'star'. The thing Petty, Springsteen and Seger really share is a stubborn determination to continue making music that really matters, which is not just content to reflect contemporary life, but offers a criticism of it and provides an alternative viewpoint.

Like Springsteen's songs, Petty's work places tenacity in opposition to the ever-threatening 'darkness' (meaninglessness or irrational chaos) of modernity. It supports the confused listener, promising 'You Can Still Change Your Mind', exhorting against 'A Wasted Life'. "I know you have to feel a little used up/And no one can give you enough/Baby hold on tight/Don't have a wasted life/I love you too much/Don't have a wasted life". And a song like Petty's "The Same Old You" or Springsteen's "Highway Patrolman", is addressed to nothing less than America itself.

**I have a dream...**

'Highway Patrolman' is the set-piece of Springsteen's Nebraska (1982), the album that symbolised his willful independence from entrepreneurial guides such as producer Jon Landau and critic Dave Marsh, two of the numerous fan- supporters who had guided him to superstar status. Nebraska renders the state of American disunion more directly and effectively than anything since the era of the Vietnam War and the writing of Hendrix, Fogerty, Sly Stone, the MC5, the Band and Dylan. But it evolves, it is clear, from a struggle with that riddle central to the title track of the earlier The River: "Is a dream a lie that don't come true/Or is it something worse?" What forces that issue is the central tenet of Springsteen's belief: this land is all our land.

The protagonists of the stark, unembellished Nebraska are largely losers — not just losers in love but in life. The fact that their belief remains resilient, even as traditions and natural justice fail, offers the only light at the end of a long tunnel: "Struck me kinda funny/Funny yeah indeed/How at the end of every hard earned day/People find some reason to believe" ('Reason To Believe'). Ostensibly — particularly to British critics — 'Highway Patrolman" is simply the story of one erring brother as told by his law-abiding elder. To American listeners, scarred by the generational battles and loss of faith the Vietnam and Watergate eras initiated, and in many areas battered by recession, it has far wider connotations. The 'brotherhood' alluded to is the one Springsteen believes should be shared by all people, the same dream explicitly espoused for America 20 years before by Dr Martin Luther King.

The rock dreams of Springsteen and Petty are not new but eternal, not revivalist, just anchored in emotions which never faded, and have now been re- articulated. Like Fogerty or Chuck Berry or Hendrix or Elvis himself, neither Petty nor Springsteen were born 'Fortunate Sons'. The message behind their music is a vision which wears no collar and knows no colour... and has never been extinguished.

© Cynthia Rose, 1984
