---
title: "Bruce Springsteen Fans Quiz Concert Download Prices"
author: "Bernard Zuel"
source: "The Sydney Morning Herald"
date: "2014-01-21"
category: "News"
---

Not every Bruce Springsteen fan has greeted news of an official concert download program with cheers. There have been questions raised about price, accessibility and sound quality, particularly when compared with other acts doing something similar.

The announcement that Springsteen, one of the most popular artists for bootlegs since his early days in the 1970s, would offer official downloads of concerts within 48 hours of their performance looked like a boon for fans. The process would involve an upfront payment for a USB wristband and later downloads of a particular concert, whether or not you attended the show.

As someone whose shows regularly change setlists dramatically, not just before the concert but mid-show, Springsteen's concerts are the kind of experiences fans swap tales and often enough rough recordings of, for weeks or months afterwards.

It is this innate appeal, however, which has caused some problems as articulated on his blog Stay Hard, Stay Hungry, Stay Alive, by Glenn Radecki; a self-described Springsteen researcher, writer and statistician and contributing writer for long running fan sites Backstreets Magazine and Brucespringsteen.net.

In a strongly worded article that called the plan a "massive blunder", Radecki unfavourably compares the suggested price for the Springsteen wristband ($US40 or $A45, with tax and postage on top) with prices for acts already offering this service such as Pearl Jam ($10 for MP3 files; $15 for the higher quality FLAC format) and Metallica (from $10). He argues the cost and availability on as somewhat compromised MP3 files, completely misunderstands Springsteen fans.

"Official recordings of live shows is something that Bruce's fanbase has been clamouring for years and years", he wrote. "There are tens of thousands of fans who want high-quality recordings of live shows who would be buying two or three or five or ten shows each if the price was fair and the format useful.

"There are hundreds of fans (and possibly more) who would buy every single show of the tour if he was doing this properly."

Another Springsteen blogger, Gene Oberto, went further, arguing: "He should be offering his shows as a momento to the audience attending and as a teaser for audiences to come on FLAC and YouTube gladly."

And that opinion was echoed by others who described the cost and MP3 delivery as "greedy".

Not surprisingly the view is not universally shared, with one fan, Shawn Poole, arguing the alternatives don't compare.

"$40 flat (or even $40 + shipping) for a professionally recorded/mixed version of one of Springsteen's legendary shows, even in mp3 format, remains a major bargain when compared to what many folks have been willing to pay over the years for often-crappy bootlegs", he wrote.

A fan only identified as Johhny B-Good reversed the accusations of greediness and suggested those complaining recognise the thought behind the initiative.

"Instead you want everything according to 'what the mighty fan base wants and think is fair", he wrote. "Wake up people! This is business and it has been way too long since this music was only for the working-class people. You think the wristband is too expensive? Then just don't buy it.

"Oh, but you really, really want it? Then download it from any pirate site.

Believe me, it doesn't make you any less of a fan."
