---
title: "Bruce Springsteen: The Springsteen Syndrome"
author: "Paul Morley"
source: "NME"
date: "1979-10-06"
category: "Concert Review"
---

Musicians United For Safe Energy: Madison Square Garden, NYC

THERE'S A puzzling ritual that goes with a Bruce Springsteen performance in America, particularly on the east coast where Springsteen's popularity is well established.

During, before and after his show there will rise a low, moaning cry of affection or yearning, seemingly out of the collected mouths of the audience, yet no mouths appear to move.

The noise sounds like a considered jeer – of derision or distaste. In fact, it's believers, and they're saying, to themselves almost, BRUCE; and they're saying it deep and lovingly and it's a funny, patient form of adoration. Religious, almost.

BROOOOOOCE they go. BOOOOOO I hear. So does Bonnie Raitt.

For the first time in ten years there is an issue of concern that is gripping Americans and giving a focus to their vague, suppressed feelings of discontent and confusion: the Jane Fondas and Ralph Naders are expertly voicing the complaints, but they're not the only ones. A new group of effective popular agitators are joining them on their platforms.

Separated from the Vietnam resentment by the phantom, embarrassing Watergate bubble is the equally outraged cry against the establishment of Nuclear Reactors; a stubborn stand against the development of nuclear power that is gaining passionate nationwide approval.

The nickname for the movement is Anti-Nuke. Cute.

The movement has touched enough people, and stung them into activity, that for a demonstration against continuing nuclear activity held on a Sunday in New York 200,000 people turned up. But a few years ago, it was only a small if widespread movement, simply a collection of unambitious consumer groups that kept their demands to the government comparatively moderate. They wanted restrictions, and solid guarantees of safety.

Since the recent Harrisburg incident indicated the potential hazards of nuclear activity to an already frightened and vulnerable American public, the movement has grown considerably and it's demands have become uncompromising.

It requests the absolute abolition of nuclear power as a source of energy.

The arguments are blurred, the commitment total, the alternatives offered idealistic and folksy. But how is rock'n'roll doing in supporting the anger and annoyance?

The rock'n'roll that Rolling Stone still treats sensitively (James Taylor on the cover?), that gets played by the radio, that is taken to be radical, is established and accepted enough to be able to make serious political gestures. Linda Ronstadt as First Lady? Senator Dave Crosby?

As they age and moult, American rock people are drifting into political arenas with definite ambitions, and the Anti-Nuke movement emphasises this bittersweet trend. That Jackson Browne and Graham Nash are again having positive effects in influencing thoughts and attitudes signifies how powerful 'rock'n'roll' can be and also how impassive, easy going and conservative the people who gain the position and power have become.

It's interesting to see what role Rock Against Racism has taken in America.

Despite obvious and hopeless race problems, where it has managed to surface RAR aims for the very core of the deceptive, disturbing anti-freedom of the American way of life; to eat away there. Their rally cries include "If you're tired of homogenized monotony polluting the airwaves...if you're fed up with the way things are and with being told to let it be...if you believe that Mother Earth is for everyone...if you're ready to switch off the '70s and face the '80s...LETS ROCK AGAINST RACISM!"

This is forward thinking and realistic politics.

To the supporters of Anti-Nuke such indignation is alien; they probably notice nothing wrong with the radio, and have only become worked up and alarmed when faced with something that threatens to directly interfere with their comfort.

The new American rock'n'roll establishment have willingly involved themselves with the hysteria that's greeted the first noticeable and 'nasty' problem that's faced the States these last few years, and that's despite the existence of everyday problems and values that have pushed America into the bland and self-deluding state that it's in today. Because of their ignorance, they added to those traumas. Now they naively sail on their ego trips to the centre of an issue that will sustain their illusions of rebellion and concern.

A handful of this new rock establishment got together to promote a five day series of concerts at Madison Square Gardens featuring many stars you thought were dead: Musicians United For Safe Energy (MUSE) would gather the proceeds from the concerts, and from the inevitable albums and films. Strict organisation was determined to make the series a profit making venture.

The concerts featured Jesse Colin Young, Poco, Doobie Brothers, Jackson Browne, Crosby Stills and Nash, John Hall, James Taylor; smart people. Clash were asked to do the Sunday show with Crosby Stills and Nash...to add a slash of feeling to the proceedings. They immediately agreed to play if they could go on after CS&N. If this had been greeted with an affirmative (some chance) then the next request was that they would only play if the ticket price was a dollar. That would have been a reduction of 17 dollars.

I clambered my way into Madison Square Gardens for the Saturday show, featuring Gil Scott Heron (who I missed as I slid up escalators and plucked up the courage to enter the forbidding arena), Peter Tosh, Bonnie Raitt, Tom Petty and Bruce Springsteen.

Springsteen's involvement was curious.

Of all the participants he was the most obviously alive, the most obviously rock'n'roll. Someone who is, like all the few great Americans, aware and scornful of the USA predicament; one whose values correspond closely to the American RAR ones. On Saturday his presence and vitality separated his performance so decisively from the supports that it was like a separate concert.

Peter Tosh is a successful 'reggae' entertainer in a nation where many radio stations still refuse to play black music of committed intention. His set was sluggish and slow, and it had to be soft around the edges for people to lap it up. Perfectly palatable; unthreatening.

Bonnie Raitt told everyone they could get up and dance if they wanted to. "But don't get too outrageous."

Her set was a contented, relaxed mix of flawless technique and tickles through country, soul, rock, R&B; styles sticking out all over the place, nothing interesting. Jackson Browne and Graham Nash simpered on stage to smooth their way through a grim ballad, receiving incongruous roars and teeny screams.

The one moment of anger was during Raitt's set when the audience were mooing through their ritual.

BROOOOOOCE they went. BOOOOOO I heard. So did Bonnie Raitt.

"I came on last night to introduce an act", she said, "and I heard you doing that and I thought you were booing. And I thought anyone who can pay 18 dollars for a ticket and then come and boo must be mad!"

BROOOOOOCE they went; with maybe a few BOOOOOOS.

"That's right", Bonnie snarled, "get it out of your system."

Around this time I was beginning to wonder what was the most boring concert I'd ever seen.

The most exciting thing was wondering who was to come on next. Eagles? Doobies? Dooley's? It was Tom Petty. With his Heartbreakers. I was momentarily stimulated by the sound of hard guitars and the sight of old fashioned posing, but I soon slumbered back into a daze as Petty revealed limited imagination and understanding. The audience response was negative and automatic; I sulked.

The audience seemed to be building up to bring Petty back for more, but as soon as Petty departed cheers turned to...

BROOOOOOCE!

The lights came up for the first time that evening. It seemed like the concert was over. In a way, that one was – the boring Anti-Nuke part, that typified the blank, slick, comforting American (rock) nature, even in moments of apparent distress.

BROOOOOOCE!

It was Springsteen's birthday. It was the first day of the Jewish New Year. It was a show that made me understand why so many Americans place so much faith in the man who has suffered such a bewildering series of highs and lows without ever coming close to establishing the fame to equal his rich and thrilling reputation. He has purpose and enthusiasm, and whilst essentially unadventurous, he is the one American who continues the rock'n'roll tradition so convincingly, sensually, innovatively, hauntingly, and...traditionally.

The more intriguing new American rock people – Talking Heads, Pere Ubu – distort, parody, reinterpret rock traditions. They travel in zigzag lines. The meekest new American rock people – Cars, Knack – paste over rock's raw edges and add nothing new. They don't travel at all.

Bruce Springsteen shoots out in a straight line. Traditional enough, but with that, vitally contemporary. He is aware, with such ravishing and reckless sensitivity, of rock'n'roll's power and potential, of the essence of its communication.

There is nothing confusing about Bruce Springsteen, but that doesn't mean nothing stimulating. He is a desperate and spirited entertainer who succeeds because he is so possessive and anxious.

Springsteen is a rock'n'roll puritan; somehow a hedonist too. He has strict values, but he's one hell of an extrovert.

He knows that rock'n'roll has to be show business; that it is poetry; that it must reach and move; that there has to be response. Only the very cynical can find fault with his simplistic desires, his respect and his delight.

Springsteen is not the greatest thing in the world; but he's not softening anybody up.

Springsteen slouched around the stage like a youthfully revitalised Colombo. Took gulps of breath between songs, greedily. His clothes fit him perfectly; things like this matter. He flung a carefully prepared birthday cake way back into the audience. He grimaced and grunted, posed and played mock-exhausted. Despite his urgency, there's an air of patience about him; He takes his time. And as he does...

BROOOOOOCE!

His set was a romanticised interpretation of an ideal rock'n'roll show. But however corny or crass he was, he was also bewitching and ecstatic. He knows that there are so many things to be balanced – to impress the feeling without trivialising – as he did magnificently on a new song, 'The River', where his control after all his racy athletics were superb – to indulge, show off and still be able to inspire.

He works hard. He's an exhibitionist like few others. What he went out of his way to do was make sure everyone in the huge Madison Square Gardens knew that he was the centre of attraction. Music came second to the physical exertion.

My lasting impression of the show is not the music – of which I remember little – but the swells of melodrama, subtle drops in pressure, its dirty edge. Of Springsteen maniacally rushing around, off, over and down to the side of the stage, charging round the back of the amplifiers to play to the people sitting there, clambering over the amplifiers, on top, clapping his hands, grinning his head off.

Every part of the arena got a long stare from Springsteen.

Somewhere amidst all this he sang some lines, uneven, strained, lustful. After a verse or two, off he'd rush, slide to the front of the stage, dash to the side, up on top of an amp; yearning, urging, fighting, laughing.

When his perfect foil, the large white suited Clarence Clemons, stepped forward to drop a slight, sleazy solo into the thick sound, applause was generous. But Springsteen never ducked out of sight.

Concerts are for brutally attracting; records are for influencing; two different forms of communication. Springsteen knows his balances. A showman and a moodman, he teases and he confronts.

At New York, he wound himself up so excitably, sang so forcefully, non- converts were forced to find out just what causing it all. I've got a lot of records to catch up on.

Traditional man; new values. An American folk hero that can mean something over here. Someone who loves himself and hates himself. A performer who can fling his guitar around his back, stand with his wiry legs just a couple of feet apart, twist slightly to watch what his bassman is doing, bare his teeth and be more rock'n'roll than anything I can think of.

Good or bad? Depends what you're looking for. When, if he comes to Britain, don't expect too much, but go look at the shadows. Go see him running around in his cage.

"I'm a prisoner of rock'n'roll."

And not afraid to act the fool with it.

© Paul Morley, 1979
