---
title: "Bruce Springsteen: Los Angeles Sports Arena, California"
author: "Sylvie Simmons"
source: "NME"
date: "1980-10-30"
category: "Concert Review"
---

Note: Published 1980-11-22

IT'S EASY to see why the girls go so much on him. You got the excitable adolescent of 'Rosalita', 'Crush On You' – hey hey hey what you say Cherri darling, quick-romance-behind-the-stadium frenzy – and you got the grand romantic tough-and-tender stuff, big gestures, big everything and he can prove it all night too.

Not that he could do too much after a show like tonight's. Four hours. Four! Most arena superstars couldn't keep it up half as long and certainly not half as exciting. But the little girls understand. Knowing of his knackered state backstage after the show they've been using the steps that join him to the audience to get up onstage and get in a two-minute smacker during the show before the roadies (no bouncers – Bruce would have them all in the dole queue, good man) gently pry them away, it being a bit hard to sing with more than one tongue per mouth.

As for the other half of the packed-in crowd, Springsteen seems to be to guys with brains and balls what Waylon and Willie are to guys with cowboy hats and beer bellies: the big little guy, the one who's broken out of the everyday crap, who embodies hopes and dreams and grand majestic visions and romance without resorting to Interflora slush. He's a lot like a musical John Ford movie with a James Brown songbook chucked in. Give the man six words (cars, front-porch, woman, streets. darkness, comb) and you'll get two dozen songs, plus enough big gestures and visions to make your soul snap in two.

It's really hard to talk about a Bruce Springsteen concert without getting sugary and poetic and totally over-the-top, which runs a risk of getting back into those 'future of rock and roll' hype-shit days, and turning the man into a caricature, a media recreation of himself with words like CELEBRATION flashing alongside the credits in neon lights. Which is why, according to the promoters, the whole 43-date tour sold out without benefit of ads, just mail- order (200,000 ticket applications in New York alone! Four nights sold out at the LA Sports Arena and people paying up to a hundred quid to touts) though the guy's been rarely heard of since his last tour two years ago. It was just, they reckoned, kids – who had no way to explain the living-breathing-rock-and- roll experience to their mates without dragging them down in person – buying the tickets themselves if they had to, with a kind of quasi-religious fervour you'd expect for a man who virtually hypnotises audiences wherever he plays.

It's been 29 months since Springsteen released Darkness On The Edge Of Town (other than The River the most quickly successful of his albums – River went in the US charts at number 2 and has just eased into top position) and when you think that it's not only a double (anathema in these days of Maggie-Reagan recession) but that in the time it's taken perfecting the thing, careers have bloomed and faded, narrow ties traded in for synthesisers and psychedelic drugs, it's easy to see the risk he's taken in getting it right (his theory was that he'd have to be playing the bloody things for the next six months, so he might as well like what he's playing) the fact the 29-city tour sold out so quickly just by word of mouth is the kind of magic you get to expect of the man. He doesn't let you down.

Pretty much the entire repertoire gets down in the four (except for a short Vitamin E break midway) hours. Thank the lord he got the thing out before it became a boxed set otherwise they'd have needed a Bruce Weekend Festival to fit the songs in.

'Born To Run' starts out on a wild note. He remembers all the words this time – the first date on the tour, Michigan, he forgot and had to rely on the audience to prompt him. It's part of the role the crowd gets to play. But this is no mere Rod Stewart pantomime. You know how most American audiences fidget and walk around and generally wander during arena shows (not the most comfortable) or noisily ruin their expensive dental work through the whole show, well this lot were transfixed during the slow ones and crazed through the fast ones like some rock and roll yoyo, and chanting "Bruuuuuuuce Bruuuuce" between songs like a herd of randy cows. 'Prove It All Night': the crowd cheers Clarence Clemon's tambourine playing, goes apeshit at his saxophone. 'Tenth Avenue Freezeout': Springsteen's voice gets hotter, raspier as it overcomes the loud, punchy music, and he leaps into the crowd, sings and conducts from the seats, faints into waiting arms, leaps back onstage, jumps in the air, lands on his knee, guitar posed just-so, an encore by song number three except he promised "I'm gonna be playing all night" to delirium from a crowd that really didn't expect any less.

Some emotional stuff: 'Darkness On The Edge Of Town' and the kinks have been ironed out of the sound system so everything's just perfect; powerful music, sincere, seductive vocals and so-natural rockstar poses that send shivers up and down your spine.

There's a movie-like quality to the songs, especially those from The River, most of which is reserved for the second half though we get a preview here. Maybe a bit less idealistic (he couldn't do more!) it's based around a working-class kid's hopes and dreams and struggles and finally defeat. For the first time a Bruce woman can get pregnant and a Bruce car can kill, like 'Wreck On The Highway'. The hymn-like 'Independence Day' and 'Working Life' get a dramatic rap about his dad, got straight out of the school and into the army, married, soon had little Brucie and so his dreams as he made his way to the factory every day were for his kids to have what he didn't. You could have heard a piece of popcorn drop in the place as he sang it – beautiful. Relieved by a raunchy 'Jacksons Cage' and 'Promised Land', back to ballads with 'The River', then onto epic proportions with 'Thunder Road', 'Badlands' and a teabreak. A perfectly paced first half stopped only by a rap about throwing green twirly things at his band and writing to your MP about ticket touts.

Second half starts on an even more crazed note: 'Cadillac', a teenage celebration (not bad for a 31-year-old) and a sexy version of the song he wrote for Robert Gordon but sings better himself: 'Fire'. Flo and Eddie add backing vocals and a big sound to 'Hungry Heart' (Hungry? Those two?!) And there's raps about college, girls as viewed from front porches and long memories, a lot of The River. The ultimate ballad: 'Point Blank'; fun premature ejaculation: 'Crush On You', some hamming it up with Clarence (of course the other star of the show) on 'Rosalita' ("such a sad song" with a fake slow intro).

Three hours or more, it's past midnight, but they're back for more encores, the melodramatic 'Jungleland' shot like a movie with fading lights, and the 'Devil In The Blue Dress' rock and roll medley with wild dancing. on the floor, on his knees, in the crowd – delirium, until there's nothing left of the guy to give. I could have taken four hours more. If this is rock and roll heaven, book me a flight.

© Sylvie Simmons, 1980
