---
title: "Brighton Centre 1981"
author: "Lynden Barber"
source: "Melody Maker"
date: "1981-06-06"
category: "Concert Review"
---

TRYING TO WRITE about a Bruce Springsteen concert without reinforcing the man's reputation for scarcely believable stage performances is like trying to cross the Atlantic in a paper yacht. Do it and you're sunk.

The simple fact is, when you see Springsteen for the first time any lingering doubts about the yards of superlatives that have been heaped on him over the years evaporate like ether.

When Springsteen's up there on stage a lifetime's hopes, passions and frustrations explode in an uninhibited cry matched only by the sense of exhilaration and freedom a mountaineer must feel on reaching the summit.

And if at times Springsteen strays too near the edge and stumbles down the slopes towards sentimentality, it's a mistake that's dwarfed by the magnitude of his overall achievement.

I must confess my biases. When Born To Run came out in 1975 I used to literally rush home to play it, and I still regard it as my favourite rock album of all time. So when I heard the E Street band playing 'Backstreets' - my favourite rock track of all time - at Brighton with a force that matched and even surpassed the intensity of the original, I was swept along on a tidal wave of overwhelming emotion.

With The River, Springsteen seemed to have lost his touch, often descending into banality; most of the "rockers" appeared to be different versions of the same song, and tracks like 'Sherry Darling' and 'Hungry Heart' seemed lightweight in comparison with much of his earlier work.

Since the concert I've realised that The River is not An Album in the same sense as Born To Run or Darkness On The Edge Of Town, but should be seen as a record that closely follows the dynamics of a live Springsteen show; an epic that balances the hedonistic joy of rock with the more complex exploration of the human emotions that characterised earlier songs like 'Badlands' and 'The Promised Land'.

But the songs are only part of the story. The recordings only hint at the power that the E Street Band achieve on stage; they begin with the kind of gut-force that most bands only begin to achieve at the end of set.

And of course there's Bruce's famed athletic achievements on the floorboards, though the most surprising thing about watching him is how he refuses to fit the traditional mould of rock superstar as Demi-God, but rather melts down the barrier between artist and performer.

Springsteen certainly doesn't look like a rock star - short and almost stocky, with none of the exaggerated sexuality of a Sting or a Jagger - and he wasn't perfect.

Sometimes the clowning and hamming went too far, such as when two "doctors" tried to force him off stage on a stretcher near the end of the set (a short one by his standards, two and a half hours including two encores).

Occasionally the heart-felt honesty strayed into slush territory, going too near to the over-the-top sentimentality of hard-core Country & Western in the new song 'Johnny Bye Bye' (about Elvis Presley's death), and sounding uncomfortably close to the sickly John Denver on Woody Guthrie's 'This Lands Is Your Land' (although Denver would never include a line about "the streets of Brixton").

But complaining too much about points like that would be like winning a Rolls Royce in a Kelloggs competition and moaning because the windscreen washers don't work.

The sceptics among you are probably going to write this off as yet another predictable "over-the-top" Bruce Springsteen review, but the power of Bruce and the E Street Band on stage is enough to move even the emotionally crippled.

Disbelieve at your own cost.