---
title: "Bruce Springsteen & The E Street Band, Hard Rock Calling: review"
author: "Neil McCormick"
source: "Telegraph"
date: "2012-07-14"
category: "Concert Review"
---

Neil McCormick was amazed by Bruce Springsteen's powerful performance, which featured a guest appearance by Sir Paul McCartney.

The Boss meets The Beatles. Paul McCartney joined Bruce Springsteen for the climax of his concert at Hyde Park, storming through I Saw Her Standing There, with Springsteen beaming "I've waited 50 years for this." And then, while two of the world's most legendary rock stars ripped into a historic, glorious, celebratory, extended romp through Twist And Shout, some joyless jobsworth from Westminster City Council turned the PA off.

It's the first time I have heard a fade out at a concert. Unaware that they had been cut off for breaking the council's curfew, the superstars played on in silence, listening to the sound of their onstage monitors and encouraged by the outraged roar of 60,000 fans, until guitarist Little Steven got the message across that their set had been summarily ended.

Never mind. By that time, they had already played for three hours and half hours, and Springsteen left the stage still grinning. If anything, the sense of confrontation with killjoy officials might have added to the occasion, conferring upon this venerable form of rock and roll entertainment performed by wealthy veterans some of its old outlaw associations. At the heart of Springsteen's songs are the struggles of ordinary people to survive against all the odds stacked against them by a merciless, uncaring state. So having a massive, communal celebration of working class values brought to an end by some anonymous government official seemed oddly appropriate. Maybe he should end all concerts like this.

It was, in any case, one of the greatest gigs I have ever witnessed. I run out of superlatives with which to describe Springsteen. I meet plenty of sceptics in my travels, intelligent music fans who remain difficult to convince that this icon of blue collar rock can really be as great a live performer as his admirers claim. His image (amongst detractors) appears to be of a kind of stolid, worthy blue collar and blue jean showman fronting a jumped up American bar band, and if you put it like that, the length of his shows sounds more like torture than celebration. But if you haven't seen Springsteen perform, then, really, you are no position to comment. I would have been happy if he had gone on for another hour. He plays sets that have grand dramatic dimensions, that rise and fall, carrying listeners on a journey, swelling from moments of stark, emotional intimacy to explosions of joy, anger and exultation. His band moves with him, adapting to the mood of the song and the moment, everything beneath his passionate vocals constantly shifting and changing. New colours and tones are brought into focus throughout, from the swinging horn section, gospelly backing singers, flamboyant violinist, dramatic organ and piano players and superb trio of lead guitarists (Nils Lofgren, Steven Van Zandt and Springsteen himself). There is a near religious aspect to a Springsteen show, he takes a lot of his stage mannerisms from the world of travelling charismatic preachers and he knows how to conduct an audience until their raised voices become a kind of rock and roll choir, and everybody feels part of something bigger than themselves. To see Springsteen is to believe in the power of music.

Highlights? There were so many. He strolled on to casually open this massive concert with a solo vocal and piano version of Thunder Road that was slow and expressive and completely reinvented one of his most loved anthems, digging out its mournful heart. The River was elegant and sad with a fantastic, uplifting chorus. My City of Ruins was devastating, Born In The USA had a British crowd punching the air and bellowing the chorus with gusto, Glory Days was a spirited ensemble blast, and Nils Lofgren tore up Because The Night with a searing solo. Songs from his latest album were every bit the equal of his established classics. The epic shifts and angry surge of Wrecking Ball were stunning, Jack Of All Trades burned with mournful anger, and the singalong gospel optimism of Land And Hope And Dreams turned the massed ranks of muddy Hyde Park revellers into London's greatest ever community singers. For me, the very best of it was a burning, electric version of The Ghost Of Tom Joad with Rage Against The Machine's Tom Morello delivering one of the most wild and eccentric guitar solos you will ever hear.

But it was all great. All three and a half hours of it, through rain and shine, from Thunder Road to the final unplanned fade out. It's a gig that will go down in history.