---
title: "Leeds 2013 Review"
author: "Paul Jeeves"
source: "The Yorkshire Post"
date: "2013-07-25"
category: "Concert Review"
---

LEEDS ARENA: It is rare that a gig truly deserves a five star review.

But for the 13,500 fans who left the inaugural show at the First Direct Arena in Leeds, there can only have been one verdict.

How often do you see a man approaching pensionable age crowd-surfing, downing beers handed to him from the audience and bringing a whole family from the front of the crowd on stage with him to dance to one of his best known tracks?

Bruce Springsteen is the consummate performer who undeniably lives up to his nickname of The Boss. He is famed for his live shows, but his gig in Leeds was something very special.

Whether it was the first occasion that you had been to a Springsteen gig, or the 100th time like many of the die-hard fans who had travelled from across the globe for the concert, this had something for everyone.

There were the rarities, hand-picked by Springsteen with his tradition of plucking sign requests from the crowd. There was Local Hero, Gotta Get That Feeling and an unexpected - but nonetheless hugely enjoyable - performance of the Creedence Clearwater Revival classic, Bad Moon Rising.

But the biggest cheers were always going to be reserved for the tracks which have become synonymous with Springsteen's live shows.

The Promised Land was followed by Hungry Heart, during which Springsteen made his way along a walkway that split the standing section of the crowd, before crowd-surfing back to the stage.

A single spotlight was cast on Springsteen as he struck up the chords to the title track of his latest album, Wrecking Ball, which gave one of the many spine-tingling moments throughout the show.

His forays into the crowd saw him grab two beers and then down them, a huge cheer erupting when he drained the last drop from each.

And that really is the essence of a Springsteen show. His lyrics are renowned for their deep sentiment, the battle of the underdog to do what is right when facing adversity.

But taken in the context of a live show, it is equally about celebrating all that is good about life - a joyous interlude to forget about the trials and tribulations of what is thrown your way.

Springsteen himself recognised the efforts that fans display to travel huge distances for his shows. He dedicated a rare performance of Secret Garden, best known from the soundtrack of the 1996 film, Jerry Maguire, to those fans who had followed him on the European leg of his tour.

The encore included the ever-present Born To Run and Dancing in the Dark, during which Springsteen brought the family from the front of the audience on stage with him - a heartwarming twist on his usual habit of helping women up from out of the crowd during the song.

There was a touching tribute to the E Street Band's saxophonist Clarence Clemons, who died in 2011, and accordion and keyboard player Danny Federici, who passed away five years ago, when their images were projected on to the big screens either side of the stage during Tenth Avenue Freeze-Out.

A second encore saw Springsteen take to the stage on his own, armed only with an acoustic guitar and harmonica to bring the show to an emotionally-charged climax with performances of If I Should Fall Behind and Thunder Road.

After 29 songs and a set which stretched for three hours and four minutes, Springsteen left the stage and paid tribute to the newest venue in Yorkshire, saying: "This is a great building, and a great place to play."

Other performers already booked to appear at the First Direct Arena include Elton John, Rod Steward and Leeds's own Kaiser Chiefs.

But the simple fact is Springsteen is going to be an impossible act to follow.