---

title: ""Springsteen on Broadway": Legends from a Life Story"
author: "Hilton Als"
source: "The New Yorker"
date: "2017-10-30"
category: "Concert Review"
---

As the rock icon sang, it became clear that the show allowed him to understand not only himself but what goes into the making of a self.

Charisma" has its origin in a Greek word for a favor or a gift, and after seeing "Springsteen on Broadway", Bruce Springsteen's new solo show (at the Walter Kerr), I felt I understood the term more clearly. Or less complicatedly. For years before I saw this production---it's a substantial one, about two hours, without intermission---I dragged my heels when it came to appreciating Springsteen's gifts. In the eighties, for example, when I looked at that rabble-rouser's tousled black hair, his bandanna, and his long face and prominent jaw, I saw nothing but danger signals; mostly, they had to do with race and class. First of all, he was from New Jersey, a state with a history of racial division, where some schools were segregated well into the forties. Then there was his accent, which sounded not Northeastern but Midwestern, as if he found that particular tone more authentic or American. By cultivating that intonation, was he expressing nostalgia for the kind of broken-cowboy-turned-mechanic blue-collar whiteness that he celebrated in his butch persona, his arms raised in triumph from a workingman's sleeveless denim jacket.

Like many songwriters, the now sixty-eight-year-old Springsteen crafts legends from his own life story. From the start---on such early masterpieces as his 1975 breakout, "Born to Run", or mid-career explorations like 1995's "The Ghost of Tom Joad"---he has written narratives in which listeners can recognize themselves, or not. I couldn't find myself in his epic odes to, presumably, young white men, with girls on the back of their motorcycles, racing through or away from suburban towns that couldn't contain their grand hopes---hopes that became broken dreams, or just real life, with deadening factory work, kids on the lawn. I was suspicious, too, about the role of the saxophonist Clarence Clemons in Springsteen's E Street Band. (Clemons played with Springsteen from 1972 until his death, in 2011.) Why was a fantastic black musician supporting a white star when there were black artists who could have benefitted from his talent? Had Clemons sold out in order to be part of the Boss's enormous commercial success? Was Springsteen using him to give himself some kind of legitimacy, as Elvis Presley did with Big Mama Thornton? Or was there genuine feeling between the two men?

My Springsteen problem, ultimately, was my problem with white masculinity in general: was it possible for straight white men to empathize with anything other than themselves, in the way that Joni Mitchell, say, could identify with that black crow, or Laura Nyro with all the inhabitants of her native New York, or Chaka Khan with the confusion and joy of a genderless world?

Listening to those female powerhouses, I shut out the sound of Springsteen's cars and electric guitars and het desire until 1993, when I saw the movie "Philadelphia." One of the first mainstream pieces about aids, the film featured Springsteen's phenomenal ballad "Streets of Philadelphia", which added so much to the images of illness, hope, and death (and won the 1993 Academy Award for Best Original Song). In a simple arrangement, he sang:

I _was bruised and battered, I couldn't tell what I felt I was unrecognizable to myself Saw my reflection in a window and didn't know my own face Oh brother are you gonna leave me wastin' away_

For those of us who didn't abandon friends and lovers who were wasting away, the song said everything we couldn't and didn't want to say: the pain was too great. Springsteen understood the aids patient's fears and emotions. He wasn't mimicking suffering for effect; he knew that in order for a song to work it had to be authentic, felt.

It was then that I began not only to listen to Springsteen but to see how limited my view of masculinity was. If a straight guy could understand what was, primarily, a gay male disease, why could I not understand him?

Springsteen's admiration for Clemons was real, and so was his understanding of the racial fear and prejudice in New Jersey---as his 2016 memoir, "Born to Run"makes clear. Equal parts James Agee's "Let Us Now Praise Famous Men" and Dylan Thomas's "A Child's Christmas in Wales", the book is a kind of supplement to his songs. In writing, Springsteen tells us as much about himself as he knows, but the stillness of the page confines him in ways that a stage and lights and a loving audience do not. Performing releases his interiority and his knowledge of what masculinity is: a construct, but no less real because of that.

At the Walter Kerr, Springsteen cribs from his book to take us on what lesser artists would call "a journey." Walking out on a dark stage that holds a piano and not much else, Springsteen, in a black T-shirt, jeans, and boots, was, from the minute I saw him, just a guy on his way to work, a guy like one of us---even if that guy wasn't exactly me. His posture isn't the greatest, but he's not a schlub: he's solid, with a habit of walking with his head down, like a race-car driver looking for his keys. Men in the balcony started chanting "Bru-u-uce! Bru-u-uce!", as he stood in the dim light, bracing himself to tell his story. His voice was instantly recognizable: slow, rougher than the Nebraska-born Henry Fonda's and not as high, but similarly distinctive. (Springsteen's intonation worked brilliantly on the title track of his 1982 album "Nebraska", in which, in another feat of ventriloquism that transmogrifies into empathy, he tells the story of the murderer Charles Starkweather.) The words came tumbling out, but at his own pace: his poor upbringing, how he was desperate to leave home, and ended up, as we all do, in one way or another, back where he started. "Now I live ten minutes away from where I grew up", he said, somewhat ruefully, in one of many amusing self- disclosures that punctuate the show.

Springsteen isn't humor-challenged, exactly---he's too self-aware not to know when to make fun of himself---but he's a romantic, and romantic feeling guides this intimate spectacle. It's impossible not to fall in love with his mother, a first-generation Italian-American, as Springsteen, seeing her from a child's perspective, describes how she never missed a day of work in her fifty years as a legal secretary, and how he loved the sound her high heels made as she walked him down the hill to school---which he hated. As an adult, he told us, he tries to live up to her cheerfulness and commitment, and if there was a dry eye in the audience as he spoke, there wasn't once he began to sing the 1982 song "My Father's House", a tribute to his Irish-Dutch father, who worked menial jobs---in a car factory, as a bus driver---and was crippled by depression:

_My father's house shines hard and bright It stands like a beacon calling me in the night Calling and calling so cold and alone Shining 'cross this dark highway where our sins lie _ As Springsteen, who was raised Catholic, sang, it became clear that his commitment to his subject matter was a kind of sermon---one that he had written in order to understand not only himself but what goes into the making of a self.

Toward the end of the show, Springsteen's wife of twenty-six years, the singer Patti Scialfa, another Italian Jersey girl, joined him onstage for two numbers. Before we heard Scialfa's crystal-clear soprano---she has an Emmylou Harris purity to her voice, but is more open-mouthed and blues- based---Springsteen, a family man still puzzling over what makes a family, talked about trust. He had lots of issues with it, he said, which meant that it had taken him a long time to find it, even with Scialfa. "In this life", he added, "you make your choices, you take your stand, you awaken the youthful spell of immortality." And there it was: the romantic's faith that if you stick with something---with love, work, your parents, skeptical fans, an America that is failing itself with the wrong President---you will make it through, and perhaps what once seemed so daunting may just turn out to be something good.