---
title: "Rock in Rio 2013 Review"
author: "Sylvio Essinger"
source: "El Globo"
date: "2013-09-21"
category: "Concert Review"
---

By the middle of his autobiography, released last year, The Who 's guitarist , Pete Townshend, confided: "Until the punk movement came along, there were only two competitors to our crown: the Rolling Stones and Bruce Springsteen. "Almost 40 years after Fri Pistols and The Clash had threatened to turn the tables, the Stones are still there, supreme, filling stadiums with his rock -powered sex and money, led by the big capitalist entrepreneur Mick Jagger. And Springsteen? He's The Boss, the worker-boss, the guy who opens and closes the store and it still makes the most intense rock shows on the planet, as one might attest the early hours of Sunday, the closing number of the World Stage, in penultimate day of Rock in Rio

Over more than two hours, Bruce led his E Street Band for a show that practically only had peaks - and those who said there was a man about to turn 64 years old would be quickly challenged. For all practical purposes, who occupied all the spaces of the stage was that dreamy boy from New Jersey, permanently plugged in and always willing to give 101 % of themselves to ward off even the most fearsome competitors.

As anyone who is facing a new client (it was his first time in Rio), Bruce did not rely only on his vast repertoire of countless hits - who also happened to be some of the songs that best depicted the hard life of the working class and beautiful American. A touching gentleness, all his energy was focused on an opening show of the "Alternative Society", Raul Seixas and Paulo Coelho, repeating what she had done a few days before, in São Paulo. The public had no time to breathe because then there he was pulling "Badlands", spitting verses the microphone and beating his Fender Telecaster with peeling paint.

After the martial "Death To My Hometown", with bass drum, accordion and violin, called for the repertoire of their latest album, "Wrecking Ball" and illustrated in an exemplary manner throughout the Americanness that Bruce does not have the slightest qualms in showing the badge.

At that point in time, the singer had begun to withdraw all its extra- musical devices to let the public four: sat on the speaker, ran among fans of gurgling, spoke in Portuguese, poured sweat on his guitar and still embodied Pastor Springsteen, calling the mass in a gesture that came to remember James Brown in his time at "the Guy Who works Harder in Show Business." Bruce asked, the people did. Bruce stopped, the people shouted, "ce - Bru, Bru - ce, olê, olê, olê, olê!" And the hits flowed, in a demonstration of what American rock is simpler and also more strong, beginning with "Hungry heart". After that, he promised he would play the entire album "Born in the USA ". Said and done. In the same order the disc, were the title track, "Cover Me", "Darlington County", "Working On The Highway", "Downbound Train", "I'm On Fire", "No Surrender", "Bobby Jean " "I'm going down ", "Glory Days ", "Dancing in the dark " (with traditional fans climb on stage ) and "My Hometown".

Justice is done: Bruce did not stop a minute, but the E Street Band also sweated to follow the boss, especially guitarists Steve Van Zandt and Nils Lofgren and saxophonist Jake Clemons. With this class in the containment, the singer went on songs for the new album ("Shackled And Drawn", "Land of Hope and Dreams"), an absolute classic ("Born to Run") and a little dance after all was a night out on Saturday ("Twist and shout" with Quote "La Bamba"). In the latter, the fires broke out, made a broom behind the door to evict the guests, but Bruce did not have to beg and still later returned to the stage, guitar and harmonica in hand, to say goodbye with a "This Hard Land". Was cansadinho? Your problem. Because the standards Springsteen was even a short concert. Oh, and he promised to return soon.

Book from now the energy.