---
title: "St Paul February 29, 2016"
author: "Ross Raihala"
source: "Twin Cities Press"
date: "2016-02-29"
category: "Concert Review"
---

If you know any of the 19,000 Bruce Springsteen fans who caught his sold-out show Monday night at St. Paul's Xcel Energy Center, be warned. They're never going to shut up about it.

Springsteen built his career on the back of his live show and, at 66, he's not only not slowing down, he's actually getting better. As crazy as it sounds, Monday's show might just be his most memorable yet at the X.

Late last year, Springsteen's label released an expanded deluxe version of his 1980 double album "The River" and the Boss decided that was the perfect opportunity to perform it live, in its entirety. Not only did it turn out to be an exciting, emotional two hours, Springsteen followed it up with more than an hour of some of his most rousing classics, each played as if it were the last song of his last concert ever.

It started simply enough, just after 8 p.m., with Springsteen and the E Street Band walking onstage with the house lights still blazing. They didn't dim until after the band wrapped the first song, "Meet Me in the City", a "River"-era outtake that sounded like it could have been a No. 1 hit. "The River", Springsteen told us, was a "coming of age record" about, among other things: dancing, laughter, jokes, sex, love, faith and lonely nights. "I wanted to make a big record that felt like life", he said, "that felt like an E Street Band show."

From there, Springsteen dived deep into "The River", which happens to open with four consecutive barn burners in "The Ties That Bind", "Sherry Darling""Jackson Cage" and "Two Hearts." The mood then shifted for "Independence Day"a stirring song about a son realizing his parents are human, too, and that it's time for him to move out of the house and get on with his life.

For "Hungry Heart", Springsteen jumped off the stage and into the general- admission floor, which featured a small catwalk that allowed him to get close enough to sweat on the fans. And midway through the song, Springsteen crowd surfed his way back to the main stage with the vigor of an 18-year-old at his first Warped Tour.

But this wasn't a show just about antics and gimmicks. Springsteen gave the slow songs every bit as much attention and turned in some truly gorgeous, touching vocal performances that made "I Wanna Marry You" and "Point Blank" every bit as entertaining as "Cadillac Ranch" and "Ramrod."

After "Wreck on the Highway", Springsteen chirped "That's 'The River!'" And had that been the end of the show, few would have left disappointed. Instead, Springsteen then launched into an "encore", which turned out to be another dozen songs (plus a cover of the Isley Brothers' "Shout").

This is where Springsteen fans started crying and hugging each other: "Badlands", "No Surrender", "Prove it All Night", "Backstreets", "Because the Night", "The Rising", "Thunder Road", "Born to Run", "Bobby Jean" (St. Paul Mayor Chris Coleman was apparently singing every word), "Dancing in the Dark""Rosalita (Come Out Tonight)" and "Tenth Avenue Freeze-Out."