---
title: "Winterland Concert Review"
author: "Ron Lillejord"
source: "The Stanford Daily"
date: "1979-01-16"
category: "Concert Review"
---

"Anyone who has seen Elvis Presley and doesn't want to be Elvis Presley has got something wrong with him"

Bruce Springsteen said that about four years ago, and at Winterland last month, he continued his obsessive pursuit of the ultimate in rock'n roll with a show that left everyone involved totally drained-happily exhausted. Joined by his phenomenal E Street Band, Springsteen put on the truest kind of rock celebration – one that pours out from the guts –from the heart.

**Every last ounce**

Springsteen and the E Streeters have the perfect "rockin your ass off" philosophy, and they know how to communicate it. Everything they do is played like they won't get another chance; every last ounce of energy is strained out of each song. " I don't give a damn for just the in betweens" Springsteen screams in the opening number, "Badlands" the veins on his neck looking like they 'd burst anytime. And when he continues, " I want your herart, I want your soul, right now." You're damn sure he means it and he will get what he wants.

The people he hadn't convinced by that time were converted when, during "Spirits In The Night", Springsteen threw himself on to the crowd massed on the floor , the people propelling him, hand by hand back to the stage.

The full tilt fearlessness of the act infected everyone and as he slapped hands directly afterward, Springsteen grinned like a kid who had never known adulation before. The audience was his.

**Dreams**

In the concert's first set, Springsteen played most of "Darkness On the Edge of Town" his latest (and best) album. In "Darkness" unlike other Springsteen albums, there's an intense awareness that your dreams can be taken away –" crushed in the dirt" – and will be if you don't fight for them. The album is tinged with bitterness and pain and lies and stolen dreams but overwhelmingly, the tone is inspirational, and that's made clear when the songs are done live.

The extended "Prove It All Night" with Roy Bittan's excellent piano brilliantly underscoring Springsteen's searing guitar opening and "The Promised Land" with the magnificent Clarence Clemons' short blast on sax fitting perfectly between Springsteen's solos on guitar and harmonica, are triumphant shouters –the roars of the survivors.

The opening set ended with "Born to Run's" shatteringly powerful "Jungleland"

"Miami" Steve Van Zandt took on the guitar chores here, and Clemons dominated the song with his matchless saz solo. At the end, stark white lighting revealed a tensed Springsteen, who wailed -' ..the poets down here don't write nothin'....they just stand back and let it all be." It was a dramatic emotional shift: the lyrics snarled out in pure anger. In a new song, "Point Blank", and again in a lengthy story told in the middle of "Backstreets" about a lover who lied to him, Springsteen would again turn frighteningly personal. You wanted to either turn away or cry. It's the not-too-pretty flip side of being a rock'n roll survivor.

In the second set, the good time rock side was allowed to burst free. The set was dominated by Springsteen songs that have been covered by others, including "Fire" where Bruce did a very good "Elvis" imitation and a rowdy "Because The Night" which blew away the strong Patti Smith version.

"Because The Night" is the closest Springsteen comes to English heavy metal; as he prowls the stage with his guitar flashing, the notes of the instrument ripping through the hall, you know that the man has heard Jimmy Page – and that he's got nothing to apologise for as far as his playing goes.

In honor of the Christmas season, Springsteen even pulled out his rocked up "

Santa Claus is Coming To Town" . Clemons put on a red cap and supplied the rich bass tones of "...you better be good for goodness sake."

**Harder and Harder**

"Backstreets", "She's the One" and "Rosalita" completed the set in forceful fashion. Springsteen and band kept pushing harder and harder during this half hour assault; there was no dip in the energy level. In "Backstreets' Danny Federeci contributed moving organ work. Drummer Max Weinberg powered "She's The One" and its short intro, the oldie "Hey Mona" with a massive bass drum beat. Bassist Gary Tallent couldn't stop moving – in "Rosalita" he jumped up and down like a crazed man.

After the two and half a hours plus that preceded them, the energy and intensity of the concert's encores were simply difficult to believe. The anthem "Born To Run" came first followed by the sing along "Tenth Avenue Freeze-Out" . Then cam a dizzying succession of golden oldies : "Raise Your Hand", "Devil with The Bliue Dress On", "Good Golly Miss Molly" and "Spinning like a Spinning top"; all frenzied, good time danceable rock.

**Powerhouse Version**

The concert ended with a powerhouse version of the Gary US Bonds oldie " A Quarter To Three" . Sitting just off stage, Bill Graham shook his head as if to say "he doesn't have to do this ! " when Springsteen jumped off ten foot high speakers.

Springsteen paused numerous times during the song, saying at one point, "I think I'm going to throw up" at another assuming a De Niro pose and asking "..are you talkin' to me ?" in response to the crowd's cheers. Then he would go and beat his brains out again belting out the chorus for all its worth.

**Revival meeting**

At the very end, it was like a revival meeting, Springsteen screaming as loud as he could - " I'm just a prisoner ......of ROCK AND ROLL .....Do you understand me ?" Then he left whipping his coat in the air, the cheers deafening.

And at that moment, I didn't much care that I was completely exhausted and couldn't hear or talk very well. All I wanted to do with my remaining energy was rave about this guy – what he does is the best thing going right now.

Neil Young put it simply – "Hey, hey. My, my. Rock and roll can never die" – and its true, because the rock spirit will always be around, on the street , somewhere. That spirit was a big part of what Winterland was, and people like Bruce Springsteen, will, I think, keep proving that it is around – proving it all night.
