---
title: "Springsteen In Newcastle 1981"
author: "David Morton"
source: "Newcastle Chronicle"
date: "2016-05-11"
category: "Concert Review"
---

Newcastle City Hall has played host to the world's greatest rock acts and staged many unforgettable shows.

The Beatles, the Stones, David Bowie, Elton John, The Who, Led Zep and many more have graced the legendary venue.

One concert that stands out took place on this day 35 years ago.

If Bruce Springsteen's later show at St James' Park in June 1985 would attain iconic status, The Boss's electrifying appearance at the City Hall on May 11, 1981 was the first time North East fans set eyes on him.

On tour to promote his latest album, The River, this was Bruce's first UK appearance since a pair of low-key shows at Hammersmith Odeon in 1975.

Backed by his formidable E Street Band - including Clarence Clemons (sax), Max Weinberg (drums) and Steve Van Zandt (guitar) - Springsteen tore through a classic set list.

Kicking off with an Elvis Presley cover, Follow That Dream, the American singer delivered numbers like Hungry Heart, Darkness On The Edge Of Town, Thunder Road and Born To Run and with remarkable energy.

Later, Springsteen would cite the Newcastle City Hall concert as one of the best three shows of a mammoth tour that stretched to around 140 dates.

Meanwhile, Peter Brennan, manager of the City Hall, would tell the Chronicle in 2011: "I have been here for 30 years and still to this day it is the best concert we've had at City Hall. Nothing has matched it.

"Some have come close but there's been nothing as good. I got to watch the concert and marvel at the man."

Rock on, Bruce...
