---
title: "Bruce Springsteen Rocks it like the 1980s"
author: "Curtis Schieber"
source: "The Columbus Dispatch"
date: "2016-04-12"
category: "Concert Review"
---

Rethinking or retooling an album once it is released is far less likely than regretting it.

Though few artists would regret releasing an album such as Bruce Springsteen's fifth release, 1980's "The River", whose 20-song double album raised eyebrows for its length and sprawling themes, the Boss revisited the entire album, song-for-song, in Value City Arena on Tuesday night. The tour supports "The Ties That Bind: The River Collection", a multi-CD reissue.

The first four albums were "young man's records", said Springsteen, as he introduced the program for the first part of the evening. With "The River" the songwriter began to explore his place in the larger community and his role in its smaller orbit, the family.

It was interesting that — as heard Tuesday night — more of the young man was present in those songs than he might have imagined.

Most important for the sold-out arena crowd, the singer, at 66, was able to rock nearly as hard as when the album was released. All-out rockers such as "Sherry Darling", which steamrolled into the audience on the back of Charlie Giordano's Hammond organ, and "Crush On You", a classic rock-and-roll song that feels like one still, displayed not only his still-potent energy but the killer ensemble playing of a seasoned band, most of which has honed its communal chops for decades.

To wit, drummer Marvelous Max Weinberg nailed the bottom all night with bassist Garry Tallent, while the double guitar attack of Nils Lofgren and Steve Van Zandt made the sound swing and also crunch. All of the E Street band seemed to be living as though it were 35 years ago.

But the first part was all about coming to terms with personal history for Springsteen.

When he performed romantic songs such as "Drive All Night", which testified maybe a bit too long, and "I Wanna Marry You", he sounded like the familiar romantic of his earliest days. When he rocked out in tunes such as "Cadillac Ranch" and others, he sounded like the party boy of old.

And when he delivered songs such as "The Price You Pay", "The River" and "Fade Away", he seemed to be finding that he saw the fallout all along.

If "Hungry Heart" — a celebratory performance Tuesday night that featured Springsteen surfing all over the crowd — was a sign that even when reality sets in, life is still good, "Independence Day" suggested he knew even then what growing up would mean.

If there was a song that with relistening sounds more significant and devastating today than it did Tuesday night, it was the album's closer, "Wreck On The Highway." A grim scenario finishing the cycle of songs, it seems to suggest it doesn't matter because it might all slip away at any moment. On Tuesday, it was almost perfunctory, as if the writer had come to realize that the meat of the record is, in fact, the meat of life.

Springsteen began a second show of hits without stop as deadline called.
