---
title: "Bruce Springsteen revisits 'The River' and more in a marathon set"
author: "Ed Masley"
source: "The Arizona Republic"
date: "2016-03-10"
category: "Concert Review"
---

Bruce Springsteen brought the E Street Band to Phoenix Thursday night to re- explore "The River", the chart-topping two-record triumph the singer recorded in the aftermath of "Darkness on the Edge of Town" as he was entering his 30s.

After setting the tone with "Meet Me in the City", a rousing outtake featured on "The Ties That Bind: The River Collection", an older, wiser Springsteen talked about "The River" as "a record where I was trying to figure out where I fit in" while making time for dancing, laughter, joy and sex.

"I want you to join us 35 summers later", Springsteen told the crowd at Talking Stick Resort Arena. "Let's go down to 'The River' and see what we find."

And with that, they dove into an album Nils Lofgren told me he remembers hearing at the time, before he'd joined the band, and thinking it felt like the first time they'd finally gotten "the sizzle and the electricity" of their live performance into the grooves of the record.

There was plenty of sizzle and electricity in Thursday's live performance of the album, in some cases more than they managed to capture in those grooves as young men — thanks in large part to the criminally underrated drumming of the great Max Weinberg and in part to the enthusiasm Springsteen has invested in the process of establishing a re-connection with this music.

The E Street Band was in fine form, a three-guitar army with three completely different types of lead guitarists (Springsteen, Lofgren and, of course, Little Steven Van Zandt), two great keyboard players (Roy Bittan and touring member Charles Giordano) and 26-year-old Jake Clemons still doing an excellent job of honoring his uncle, Clarence Clemons. But it goes beyond the playing to the ties that bind these guys together. There's a chemistry that can't be faked when Bruce and Little Steven share a microphone. Even when it couldn't be more obvious that those moments are staged, it feels sincere. Because it's Springsteen.

"The River" has some of the rowdiest songs in Springsteen's catalog. And the pacing of the album allowed them to follow a rollicking "Out in the Street"

with the punkish abandon of "Crush On You" and an even more electrifying "You Can Look (But You Better Not Touch)."

It wouldn't be a stretch to hear those moments — and "Cadillac Ranch" and "I'm a Rocker" and several others — as Springsteen filtering his fondness for the early days of rock and roll through the aesthetic of the punk and New Wave era in which those songs were born. He did write "Hungry Heart" for the Ramones (although, ironically, that isn't one of those moments).

But "The River" wouldn't hold up as a framework for a proper Springsteen concert if it didn't offer more that, if it didn't allow for the drama of the title track and "Point Blank" or the tenderness of a soulful "Fade Away", the romantic longing of "I Wanna Marry You", a song about the kind of love you dream about before you really know what love is all about.

As Springsteen told the crowd, "You always dream of the kind of love that comes without consequences, without struggle and without responsibility. It's the kind that doesn't exist."

A Springsteen concert thrives on opportunities for sharing, which he did in setting up the song that provided the concert's emotional highlight, a melancholy "Independence Day", as the kind of song you write when you're young and all you can see when you look at your parents are the compromises they had to make to get there.

"You're too young to see the blessings that come with that compromise"Springsteen continued. "And the whole idea of the world closing in just frightens you and all you want to do is get out, get out, get out from under.

So I had a simple setting for this song. It was just a late-night conversation around the kitchen table between two people that loved each other but were struggling to understand one another."

Of course, he followed that touching performance of "Independence Day" by crowd-surfing to "Hungry Heart." But Springsteen concerts need those moments, too.

It felt like he was pouring everything he ever loved about the history of soul into that vocal on "The Price You Pay" as "The River" pulled into the final stretch, where an epic "Drive All Night" was followed by a suitably haunted rendition of "Wreck on the Highway", the existential meditation that brings the album to a powerful conclusion. Springsteen ended the song by sharing his thoughts on what "The River" was really all about and maybe why he's chosen to revisit that particular album.

"The River", he said is about "how you learn the adult life and you choose your partner and you choose your work and that clock starts ticking and you walk alongside not only the people you've chosen to live your life with but you walk alongside of your own mortality and you realize you have a limited amount of time to raise your family, to do your job, to try and do something good. That's 'The River.'"

It's also a really long album. But in the course of a three-and-a-half-hour concert, that still left plenty of time for Springsteen and the E Street Band to look beyond "The River", bringing the show to a rousing finale while making their way through some of Springsteen's finest work, including a triumphant "Badlands", "No Surrender", "Candy's Room", "Because the Night", "She's the One" and "Thunder Road." And then you had the six-song encore that started with a fan request for "Glory Days" and featured such crowd-pleasing highlights as "Born to Run", "Dancing in the Dark", "Rosalita (Come Out Tonight) and "Tenth Avenue Freeze-Out" (which featured a tribute to the late great Big Man, Clarence Clemons, ending the night on a spirited high note with a playful version of the Isley Brothers' "Shout."

At 66, the singer's voice has clearly aged a bit since the recording of "The River." He can't hit the high notes like he used to, which explains the altered melody on "Born to Run." But he made up for it with his delivery. The phrasing on "The Price You Pay" was brilliant, a soulful, conversational approach that brought out every nuance of the lyrics. And he belted out the rockers with reckless abandon and total conviction while squeezing every last drop of emotion out of "Independence Day.
