---
title: "Bruce Springsteen and The E Street Band at Cynthia Woods Mitchell Pavilion"
author: "Craig Hlavaty"
source: "Houston Chronicle"
date: "2014-05-06"
category: "Concert Review"
---

The reason that Tuesday night's Bruce Springsteen show was so special wasn't actually revealed until after the E Street Band took their bows and left the stage after a rip-roaring 28-song set. Springsteen then found himself by his sweaty lonesome onstage, just a man and a harmonica.

He told the tale of when he and the band were just babes touring the land, a freshly signed record contract in their back pockets, the ink not even dry.

They had all discovered they hated flying on airplanes after a traumatic East to West Coast flight and so all made a pact that they would from then on take trains from gig to gig. That didn't last long as the band became a worldwide sensation and well, you can't take a train to Europe or Australia. The logistics and all.

The band had a four-night run of shows at the Liberty Hall here in Houston to play in March 1974, and thus booked a train trip from New York to Houston.

Obviously it took longer than expected, Springsteen told us, and an unseasonably warm March didn't help matters.

But Houston embraced the band, Springsteen said, one still sweaty and delirious from a train for four days.

"Houston took us to heart right from the beginning", he grinned, strumming the first few flourishes of "Thunder Road" from 1975's Born To Run.

Bruce Springsteen and the E Street Band played the Cynthia Woods Mitchell Pavilion on Tuesday night for the first time in the venue's nearly 25 years of hosting concerts. Springsteen's traveling show turned in a set, clocking in at just over three hours, that veered from power pop nostalgia, Jersey grime, to fits of foot-stomping hallelujah that made the trees surrounding the venue rumble to drummer Max Weinberg's stern beat. Having now fully installed '90s guitar pedal god Tom Morello into the band's front line, they are louder than you remember, too. The band's visit last weekend to The New Orleans Jazz and Heritage Festival seemed to have also stayed on their clothes, as they were injecting plenty of that city's rhythm into the set list.

This was also Springsteen's first Houston visit since an April 2009 Toyota Center date touring behind that year's middling, but charming, Working On A Dream album. The Springsteen apparatus only got as close as Austin during the SXSW promo push for 2012's Wrecking Ball, so the Bayou City was long overdue for a holy rollin' Boss revival session.

His newest release, High Hopes, is a grab bag of covers, re-imagined live nuggets, and songs that didn't make it onto the last few full-length offerings. It's not an album of misfit toys, that much is for sure. Two cuts from that album cuts made the set list on Tuesday night.

Tuesday night's show was wildly fan-interactive from start to finish, from Springsteen and company tearing into songs that fans in the pit in front of the stage had requested on homemade poster boards, to pulling up not one, but three people onstage to dance or sing with the band. A man wrote on poster board that he had "busted his brother out of class" to sing "No Surrender" and within seconds of Springsteen reading that, he and his younger brother were doing just that. The pair flanked Springsteen and shared a microphone with him, nervous joy enveloping them. One woman got to briefly reenact the music video for "Dancing In The Dark" with Springsteen too.

A great deal of Tuesday night's set list came from those request boards too.

"One Step Up", from 1987's Tunnel Of Love, was played live for the first time with the full band since a 1988 tour. It had been a part of subsequent solo acoustic shows though.

"Damn, how many people here weren't even born in 1988?" Springsteen cracked.

The raunchy Human Touch cut "All or Nothin' at All" got its tour premiere Tuesday night as well. The band seems to have more footing now when it comes to material from 2012's Wrecking Ball, with songs like "Shackled and Drawn""Death to My Hometown" and the title track not as awkward as they once were.

Too bad Springsteen didn't dedicate "Wrecking Ball" to the Astrodome, as the lyrics are pretty apt for the old concrete gal.

The band's sonics change on each tour cycle, as die-hards can attest to from years of poring over bootlegs, and right now the band is a sneering, boisterous gaggle of energy. Late '80s chestnut "Light Of Day" — which Springsteen wrote for a Michael J. Fox and Joan Jett flick — began with a perverse guitar solo from The Boss seemed to have blew a hot breeze into the pavilion. "The Ghost of Tom Joad" featured guitarist Morello and Springsteen trading lines and licks, and Morello amply proving that he was the best thing to come out of Rage Against The Machine, besides all those cool jock jams.

He's been filling in for Steven Van Zandt a lot lately, but it would be travesty if Morello didn't stick around and become a full-time member. He adds a fire under the group that was greatly needed, as if guitarist Nils Lofgren wasn't already enough.

Texas guitar slinger Joe Ely arrived during the encore to crank out "Great Balls of Fire" and "Lucille" with the band, and wouldn't you know it, Springsteen also has downloaded Little Richard's voice into that astonishing brain housing group of his.

This was also the band's first time in town sans late saxophonist Clarence Clemons, whose nephew Jake Clemons has taken up his uncle's spot in the E Street gang. "Come on Jake!" was a constant cry from Springsteen, calling Clemons into the spotlight to grease up the track. He even has his uncle's mannerisms and wail down for "Tenth Avenue Freeze-Out", which is now more or less a five-minute rapturous ode to the fallen Big Man.

Once again, as he does in most every city he tours, Springsteen made sure that a local food pantry got some love at the show. A Houston Food Bank employee said late Tuesday evening that Springsteen's tour had set aside an amount of concert tickets for last night's show to be part of a silent auction, with proceeds going to the bank. In addition, Houston Food Bank staff were in the concession areas taking up donations.

Seeds High Hopes (The Havalinas cover) Badlands Adam Raised a Cain She's the One One Step Up Jesse James (Bascom Lamar Lunsford cover) How Can a Poor Man Stand Such Times and Live? (Blind Alfred Reed cover) Wrecking Ball Death to My Hometown Night No Surrender Backstreets Because the Night Downbound Train I'm on Fire All or Nothin' at All Shackled and Drawn The Ghost of Tom Joad The Rising Light of Day

Encore:

Great Balls of Fire (Jerry Lee Lewis cover) Lucille (Little Richard cover) (both with Joe Ely) Born to Run Rosalita (Come Out Tonight) Dancing in the Dark Tenth Avenue Freeze-Out Shout (The Isley Brothers cover)

Encore 2: Thunder Road (Bruce solo)
