---
title: "Springsteen Memories: Little Bits Of His Dream"
author: "Steve Morse"
source: "Boston Globe"
date: "1999-08-15"
category: "Commentary"
---

My favorite Bruce Springsteen concert memory?

Springsteen in 1978 at Boston Garden -- a site he loved because it was "low rent" and "sweaty." He leaps into the crowd during "Spirit in the Night"tears through the aisle, and jumps onto the chair next to mine. It's like sitting next to an electric generator. His eyes are wild and possessed, as he lifts them, along with his fist, toward the far balcony.

It's a primal moment that lasts an instant in linear time, but no doubt a lifetime for anybody in that row of seats.

Such close encounters have occurred many times when Springsteen has played the Boston area -- and, combined with a charisma that leaves most of his peers flat-footed, helps explains why all tickets to his upcoming five FleetCenter shows (Aug. 21, 22, 24, 26, 37) were sold in a single day.

My Bruce baptism came shortly before that Garden show in 1978, when he played the Music Hall (now the Wang Center). He dashed around in a three-piece black suit (yes, this from the man who would later define the jeans-and-T-shirt look) and again jumped boldly into the crowd. He was unafraid because he always saw his fans as brothers and friends, rather than pawns to be fleeced in a marketing scheme.

Springsteen opened that Music Hall show with "Badlands" -- the cornerstone of his "Darkness on the Edge of Town" album. Then, a few months later at the Garden, he opened with a complete change of pace -- the Wynonie Harris hit "Good Rockin' Tonight." (On the West Coast during that tour, he opened with Buddy Holly's "Rave On.")

The point is, Springsteen is always changing in concert -- not to the extent that the Grateful Dead did from night to night, but enough to give the faithful more reasons to believe -- and more reasons to make him the Boss of the box office.

Springsteen's new reunion tour with the E Street Band is a blockbuster, but he's been building a local fan base ever since his first Boston date at the now-defunct Paul's Mall in 1973. He followed with shows at Oliver's, Joe's Place, and Charlie's Bar (see timeline on Page N4), where his future biographer, Dave Marsh, then living in Somerville, saw him for the first time.

"He and the band did everything from originals to Fats Domino to a classical prelude to 'New York City Serenade', " Marsh recalled in a recent phone interview. "And the next day, my thighs were sore. I realized I'd pounded them so hard in my clumsy, honky kind of way, because I had never experienced that kind of intensity before at a concert."

I never saw Springsteen in a club, but have been an ardent convert since since the '78 Music Hall date. There's simply no one, Mick Jagger included, who can match his endurance (he played for 3 hours 30 minutes at one Worcester Centrum show in '84) and athleticism.

Springsteen, now 49, has jumped on and off more stages, and more speakers, than most artists could count. As fellow performer and friend Bruce Hornsby said this week: "He's always worked hard and been willing to give up his body for the people. His energy level is way above everybody else's."

Springsteen departed from his rock-as-Olympic-decathlon approach during a solo acoustic tour to back his more somber "Ghost of Tom Joad" album in 1995-96. At one of his Orpheum shows on that tour, Springsteen even asked fans to be silent during his softer songs. It was a philosophically nourishing if not physically liberating show, though Springsteen flashed echoes of his old self when he pulled out a 12-string guitar and wailed through "Darkness on the Edge of Town." That moment was worth the price of admission for most Springsteen diehards.

The athletic Springsteen is back on this new tour, judging from the opening night this writer caught at the Meadowlands in New Jersey last month (the first of a record 15 nights at the Continental Airlines Arena). Springsteen wore out the rest of the band -- especially saxophonist Clarence Clemons, who was sweating profusely as he tried to keep up. Springsteen poured on the classics -- from "Thunder Road" to "10th Avenue Freezeout" -- and played for three hours, reminding fans of the glory days of the E Street Band.

Those glory days date back 20 years, to when the Springsteen legend was cemented in Boston. Some of the many high points came during another series of shows at Boston Garden, in December 1980, backing his album "The River."

During the song "Promised Land", he jumped to the front of the stage, shook his hands in the air, and screamed to fans, "What are you waiting for?"

That night began with his signature anthem, "Born to Run." And before it was over, he ranged from an R & B roadhouse style ("Cadillac Walk"), to country ("Wreck on the Highway"), acid rock ("Because the Night", complete with his own nerve-shredding guitar solo) and the sensitive parlor music of "4th of July, Asbury Park (Sandy)", featuring E Streeter Danny Federici on cafe-style accordion. Then there was the moment when Springsteen pulled a woman up to dance during "Sherry Darling" -- a gesture that would often be repeated a few years later when he sang his radio hit, "Dancing in the Dark."

At that 1980 Garden show, Springsteen also delivered the between- song raps that were becoming a trademark. He talked a lot about his father, whom he said was "afraid to dream, afraid to think that things could ever get better." Such soul-baring would eventually become as important to fans as Springsteen's athletic and musical feats. He even gave long-in-advance hints of his future domesticity (he now has three children with Patti Scialfa, once a backup singer in the band). "Your dreams remain dreams until you take a chance with people", he said.

At the Worcester Centrum in 1984, during the tour that celebrated his 12-million-selling "Born in the U.S.A." disc, Springsteen talked about dreams again. He said that, as a child, listening to Elvis Presley had first set his mind free and allowed him to dream. "I'm real lucky", he said. "I get to live a little bit of my dream every night."

By the time Springsteen and the E Street Band hit the Centrum in 1988 (augmented by La Bamba Horns), he was asking the audience to think as much as to boogie. It was the "Tunnel of Love" tour, framed around a pensive album that was a reaction to the mega-celebrity breakthrough of "Born in the U.S.A."

He did only two songs from the earlier album, instead adding four obscure B-sides -- a sign that he was asking to be judged as a songwriter, not a hit machine.

Springsteen also indulged in more cabaret at that show than he has before or since. He pretended to buy tickets from a tuxedoed carny barker at a counter marked "Tunnel of Love Express Tour." He was dressed in a white shirt and cream-colored vest, and at one point he sat on a park bench on stage, reminiscing with Clemons about the days when they would stare at passing girls and discuss their romantic hopes. It was a little strange, but he still rocked home with the Bo Diddley beat of "She's the One" and the Lloyd Price-like New Orleans sound of "You Can Look." An acoustic "Born to Run" was another highlight.

The magic was less apparent in 1992 when, after breaking up with the E Street Band (he wanted to do something different after so many years together), Springsteen returned to the Centrum with a pasted- together group of players that included Shane Fontayne on guitar and R&B great Bobby King on vocals. The sole E Street holdovers were Scialfa (by then his wife) and keyboardist Roy Bittan.

I had seen the opening night of the '92 tour in New Jersey and was not overly impressed, but the group had coalesced by the time it hit the Centrum and then Boston Garden, where J. Geils Band singer Peter Wolf joined Springsteen for an encore one night.

Still, it was not enough to make diehards forget the E Street Band, which is why this summer of '99 reunion tour -- the first in a decade with his E Street comrades -- is a welcome jolt for fans looking to get their batteries recharged once again.
