---
title: "A Springsteen Treat For 30,000 At Saratoga Performing Arts Center On Friday Night"
author: "Steve Morse"
source: "Boston Globe"
date: "1984-07-27"
category: "Concert Review"
---

Note: Published 1984-07-30

SARATOGA SPRINGS, N.Y. - There were no lasers, no smoke bombs, no props and no expensive costumes. All of those typical components of a modern rock show were stripped away. It was back to fundamentals, back to the music alone, back to Bruce Springsteen with his fist slicing through the air and his raspy voice raging into the night.

In his first Northeast concert in more than two years, New Jersey's keeper of the flame burned brighter than ever before a boisterous crowd of 30,000 fans nestled onto a muddy hillside in this Victorian resort village.

It was another stupendous, superhuman performance by Springsteen, who remains the hands-down gold medal winner for rock endurance. His 3-hour-and- 15-minute opus was like seeing two shows for the price of one.

In fact, he was extra herculean since not only was this the biggest show of his summer tour to date, it was also his debut in Saratoga's wondrousamphitheater, where 5000 lucky fans sat under a handsomely baffled ceiling while the rest stood and boogied out on the sloping lawn, watching a towering video screen if they couldn't see the stage.

So intense was the desire for tickets that for the first time in the Performing Arts Center's 19-year history, lawn sales were cut off days before the show for safety reasons. Otherwise, the house record of 37,500 set by the Grateful Dead last month would have easily been broken, said Saratoga spokesman Pete Hopper.

His arms bulging from a recent weightlifting regimen, Springsteen churned through two electrifying sets. He talked less than usual - keeping his working class, Studs Terkel-like narratives to a minimum - and instead played more music (a full 30 songs, with stunning segues and improvisations) and added more theatrics, such as twice sliding across the stage like Ty Cobb, slipping into choregraphed dance steps with his band and hamming it up with saxophonist Clarence Clemons and new lead guitarist Nils Lofgren. The latter fit in beautifully and added theatrics of his own such as playing guitar with his teeth and doing a back flip off a trampoline.

Springsteen opened on a full-steam note with "Badlands", carrying its live- for-today message into "Prove It All Night", ending with a savage, bucking- bronco guitar solo. "Out on the Street" then spotlighted his unwavering, cool- cat rebelliousness ("When I'm out on the street I walk the way I want to walk"), tempered by three artfully reworked songs from his acoustic "Nebraska" album, "Atlantic City", "Johnny 99" and "Highway Patrolman", raising echoes of Hank Williams in their sympathetic defense of American losers and receiving sparse, elegiac backup from the E Street Band.

Checking the pulse of the crowd, Springsteen, looking like a construction foreman in a dungaree vest and jeans, sparked long "sha- la-la" harmonies on "Darlington County", followed by a mesmerizing sequence from the pop bounce of "Glory Days" (a slap at people who mourn the past and a slap at hypocritical New Jersey friends who flatter him now but "wouldn't speak to me" years ago); then on to the euphoric "Promised Land", the misty "Used Cars" (another "Nebraska" song upgraded this time by Roy Bittan's luminous accordion fills); the aching song of American pride, "My Hometown", the cawing declaration of "Born in the U.S.A." and the R & B ecstasy of "Thunder Road."

The magic resumed in the second set. "Hungry Heart" established a snappy note that continued with his new hit "Dancing in the Dark", during which he avoided a precarious rush from a female fan by beckoning her to dance, then swept her in his arms for a kiss before helping her jump back into the crowd. "Cadillac Ranch", one of five songs from "The River" LP, kept up this dance pace which peaked with the 50s-style "Sherry Darling" (Clemons, introduced as "living history", added a flurry of sax honks) before settling down with "No Surrender", a rock song from Springsteen's latest album, "Born in the U.S.A."but rearranged into an acoustic treasure here.

The home stretch, as usual, was a sprint. As he jumped on speakers and dashed around to exhort the crowd, Springsteen rocketed through "Because the Night"the rockabillyish "Pink Cadillac", the street-cool "Rosalita" (the only song from his first two albums), a funkified "Fire" and delirious encores of Mitch Ryder's "Devil with a Blue Dress", the Stones' "Street Fighting Man" (given a near heavy- metal treatment) and the old blues, "C.C. Rider." It was rock heaven all the way.
