---
title: "Springsteen Embraces New Tour Sponsor: Love"
author: "Steve Morse"
source: "Boston Globe"
date: "1992-07-23"
category: "Concert Review"
---

BRUCE SPRINGSTEEN At: the Brendan Bryne Arena, first of 11 nights

EAST RUTHERFORD, N.J. -- The red carpet wasn't out, but a surreal, blue-and- white, 30-by-100-foot banner was. Draped over the Brendan Byrne Arena, and large enough to be seen from the distant highway, it said: "WELCOME HOME BRUCE." It honored New Jersey's favorite rock 'n' roll son, Bruce Springsteen, who opened his American tour last night with the first of 11 sold-out shows at the Meadowlands that will pull in 224,000 fans before the run ends.

The noise was deafening, the adoration was Pope-like, and it only took Springsteen's first words (a bashful "Hello, my friends") to again tie the bond with devotees who've hungered for his return after four years absent from the stage.

The night would prove a triumph, but this was not quite the same as past, supremely confident Springsteen shows. He wavered at times, especially in the first set, making this feel very much like a new start, even though he's just played a month in Europe.

He fumbled early (his famed iron nerves showed signs of anxiety in his song introductions as well) as he searched to find a musical flow. He's been shuffling song lists dramatically -- at one show in Europe, for instance, he did eight songs from his best-selling "Born in the U.S.A." album, while other shows had only a few.

Springsteen has so much eclectic material at this point in his career that it appears hard for him to pace shows as evenly as in the past. That was the problem at the start last night, as he rather awkwardly followed a feisty "Better Days" and "Local Hero" (which had the crowd roaring with regional pride) with a solo, coffeehouse version of an older hit, "Dancing in the Dark", which seemed like Sting doing "Message in a Bottle" after he left his band the Police. Worse, Springsteen followed with a surprisingly lame "Darkness on the Edge of Town", another old hit that failed to connect.

But fortunately, once Springsteen found his sea legs, there was no stopping him. After a dance-club version of his TV spoof, "57 Channels (and Nothin"

On)", complete with samples of TV interviews after the Los Angeles riots ("Prejudice hurts!" was the climactic sample), he went into another zone.

He then turned a stately corner between the country desperation of "The River" to the hard-rocking catharsis of "Living Proof", about the joyful birth of his son, Evan James, two years ago. He'd found his flow -- and the optimism of his newer material (from his "Human Touch" and "Lucky Town" albums) was the catalyst.

Since his last tour, Springsteen has been divorced, remarried and fathered two children. Those experiences made last night's show less of a party than before, but no less an honest look at where he is today, which is all Springsteen has ever promised. He talked several times about his kids ("Are there any moms and pops in the audience?" he asked) and got downright gushy about his guiding principle in 1992 -- love.

"We have a sponsor tonight", he said. "I'm not going to sell you beer or sell you sneakers. Our sponsor is love. This next section of the show is for lovers only." There followed several new songs -- the anthemic "Leap of Faith" (about having "the guts" to fall in love), the R&B raveup of "Man's Job" (with backup singer Bobby King coming forward to duet majestically) and the rollicking "Roll of the Dice", which closed the first set after 90 minutes.

The second set was more like vintage Springsteen. Unexpectedly, he opened with three nuggets -- the sinuous "Prove It All Night", the keyboard-pumping "Cover Me" (during which he took one of his many tasty guitar solos last night), and the more inward "Brilliant Disguise", where his wife Patti Scialfa came out on vocal harmony, turning it into a lover's affirmation.

Springsteen's new band didn't have the overall power of his longtime E Street Band (sorry, but let's not kid anyone about that), though holdover keyboardist Roy Bittan was the definite glue. One missed the shared musical wisdom and seasoning of the E Street Band (new guitarist Shane Fontayne, rushed some arrangements, while bassist Tommy Sims was not assertive at times), but Springsteen's ace in the hole was his new six-member backup chorus (keyed by Crystal Taliefero, formerly with Bob Seger and Billy Joel), whose enthusiasm breathed new life into home-stretch tunes like "Born in the U.S.A." and "Glory Days." Overall, this was a different Springsteen show, but it still scaled enough heights to please the faithful.
