---
title: "Springsteen Finds Renewed Harmony With E Street Band"
author: "Steve Morse"
source: "Boston Globe"
date: "1999-08-27"
category: "Concert Review"
---

Bruce Springsteen is ecstatic about the way his reunion tour with the E Street Band is going.

"I'm the happiest I've ever been with the band", he said after his last show in Boston on Friday night. "I think they're playing better than ever.

Everybody came in with a great attitude, and it's stayed that way."

Sitting backstage at the FleetCenter in a workingman's T-shirt and jeans, Springsteen added that "everybody knows their roles and has improved their playing." He also was thrilled to have guitarists Nils Lofgren and Miami Steve Van Zandt onstage together for the first time. They were in the band during different eras.

As for the future, Springsteen said there's "a long road to go" on this tour, but hinted broadly when the question of whether he would record with the band was raised. "For the past 25 years", he said, "I've made band records and acoustic records. And I'll continue to do that in the future."

Springsteen noted that any friction with the E Street Band, which had not been together in the previous decade as he pursued other projects, was overblown by the media. "I've always stayed in touch with them", he said. "We've always remained friends."

Springsteen's whole point on this tour, he emphasized, is to "be right here, right now, in the present. That's why I ask the crowd, 'Are you alive right now?' I'm interested in the present."

His renewed closeness with the E Street Band ("I really feel I'm playing with the full band for the first time") has enabled him to dig deep to play more than 70 songs on the tour, which already has entailed a European leg, then 15 shows in New Jersey and five in Boston.

"In New Jersey, we were also rehearsing an hour a day", he said, noting that helped them to work up more material.

His renewed faith in the band has also permitted him to "call a lot of audibles" during a given show. For instance, at Friday's three-hour finale at the FleetCenter, he diverted liberally from his planned song list, as the mood struck him. And his sense of experimentation was evident, as he opened with the surprise hard- rocking "Candy's Room", followed by "Ties That Bind" and "Adam Raised a Cain", both of which had opened other Boston shows last week.

To stack that trio together was purely speculative, "but at the end of them, when I saw how the crowd reacted, I thought, 'Wow, that worked.' "

What has also worked is a pattern of stacking "Jungleland" and "Born to Run" together on the encores. "When we did that, things just exploded", he said. As for the noise of the audience, which sings along with a gusto that sometimes belies their years, Springsteen said: "I've been amazed by the reaction. I looked out tonight, and it was so loud that I saw some people had their fingers in their ears."

Springsteen is most pleased to be able to showcase songs from his turning- point album, "Darkness at the Edge of Town", from 1978. As his manager, Jon Landau, said Friday, "We're not doing a lot of the hits." Instead, they're featuring such "Darkness" tunes as the title track, "Badlands", and "The Promised Land."

"I thought when I wrote those songs that they'd be interesting to sing 20 years later. I really wondered what it would be like", said Springsteen. "And now, they're a large part of the show."

While known as his own harshest critic, Springsteen admitted that he's pleased with his performance so far. "I think there's more subtlety in my voice now"he said, crediting his solo tour in 1996 (for "The Ghost of Tom Joad" CD) for that.

"And I still have the falsetto in my voice. Why it's still there is a mystery.

Usually, I lose it because I'm singing so hard. But I think I've learned to sing better. I have more vocal range, and I'm really happy with that."
