---
title: "Springsteen Tickets Sell Out In 2 Hours"
author: "Steve Morse"
source: "Boston Globe"
date: "1988-02-14"
category: "News"
---

The week-long wait for Bruce Springsteen tickets ended in a rush yesterday.

Tickets for his three upcoming Worcester Centrum shows went on sale yesterday afternoon and about 34,000 tickets -- $680,000 worth -- were sold in slightly more than two hours.

Lines formed quickly for the 2 p.m. sale at local Ticketmaster outlets such as the Orpheum Theater and Tower Records. Radio stations WBCN and KISS-108 had spread the word after being notified at noontime by agents of Tea Party Concerts. They're the promoters for Springsteen's Feb. 25, 28 and 29 Centrum shows, which will open his first national tour in two years.

The Centrum dates were first announced a week ago, but the delay in releasing tickets stemmed from Springsteen's management not wanting scalpers to have extra time to inflate their prices, a spokesman confirmed yesterday from New York.

"You can never get rid of scalpers, but at least this gives them less time to get an ad in the newspaper and sell something that way", the spokesman said.

"And by putting the tickets on sale on a Saturday, we also gave more people a chance to get them", the spokesman added. "We always have tried to go on sale on weekends. Otherwise, so much of the audience works or is in school."

Yesterday, it didn't matter whether Springsteen-lovers were working or not.

"Yeah, I admit it. I skipped out of work. My son called me and I just had to get down here", said Paul Williams of Brockton, while waiting in an Orpheum Theater line that at its longest stretched two blocks.

"We had free tickets to the ballet, but those didn't matter when we heard about this", said Susan Loucks. "Priorities are priorities", her friend, Claudia Dunne, laughed as they stood in line. It took two hours of waiting, but they got their tickets. "I am the ballet now", said Loucks, doing a festive pirouette as she left the box office.

A fierce wind was blowing in 27-degree temperatures, but no one complained.

"We were supposed to go skiing in Waterville Valley today, but my friend called and said we're doing something else. Here we are", said Ernie Galipeau of Waltham. "This is really not too bad. It's worth the wait", added Mark MacNeil.

Orpheum box office manager Paul MacDonald said the crowd was orderly. The same at the Centrum, according to spokesman Ed Lavoie, who said the Centrum only serviced tickets to the 2,000 youths given priority wrist bands a week ago to keep them from camping out overnight.

As it was, about 50 youths braved Friday's snowstorm and spent that evening in sleeping bags around the Centrum, Lavoie said. Yet they didn't have wrist bands and were told they had to buy their tickets at other Worcester Ticketmaster outlets such as the Good Vibrations record store and Angel Video.

All Springsteen tickets cost $20 each, with an additional $2.25 service charge. "I'm just glad it's over", the Centrum's Lavoie said. "It's been a rough week. Maybe now I can sleep."
