---
title: "Springsteen To Join Amnesty Tour"
author: "Steve Morse"
source: "Boston Globe"
date: "1988-07-04"
category: "News"
---

Bruce Springsteen and the Grateful Dead played in different countries this holiday weekend, but both seized the attention of New Englanders. Springsteen staged a concert radio broadcast yesterday from Stockholm, Sweden, while the Dead drew 80,000 fans over two shows at the Oxford Plains Speedway in Maine.

Springsteen's concert was aired over WBCN -- and was spiced by news that he'll join the Amnesty International tour this fall. The global tour will now star Springsteen, Peter Gabriel, Sting, Youssou N'dour, Tracy Chapman and "one regional act per continent", Jack Healey, director of Amnesty International, said during the broadcast.

The tour will open at London's Wembley Stadium on Sept. 2, then move to Philadelphia's JFK Stadium on Sept. 17. Healey did not give further venues, just other destinations, among them Montreal, Toronto, Los Angeles, Paris, Torino (Italy), Costa Rica, Sao Paulo (Brazil) and Buenos Aires and Mendoza in Argentina. "We're also hoping to go to Asia and Africa", he said. (Ticket information will be announced in two weeks.) "Support human rights for everyone and let freedom ring", Springsteen said when pledging his Amnesty involvement at the end of his first set, which turned out to be his only set on the radio. WBCN was then flooded with "2,000 phone calls", spokesman Steve Strick said, from listeners angry at the sets"

omission. "It wasn't our fault", Strick said. "We got the show from DIR Broadcasting (via syndication), and we were given no other information."

The first set, at any rate, was a beauty. It was roughly the same as when Springsteen opened his tour at the Worcester Centrum in February, except for the additions of the blues standard, "Boom Boom Boom", and Bob Dylan's 1964 protest song, "Chimes of Freedom."

Springsteen kept his verbal introductions to a minimum this time, but he did dedicate the song "Spare Parts, Broken Hearts" to a woman he hopes "will put away her past and find something new and beautiful in her life now." It was believed to be a reference to his estranged wife, Julianne Phillips.
