---
title: "Springsteen To Open Tour At Centrum"
author: "Steve Morse"
source: "Boston Globe"
date: "1988-02-05"
category: "News"
---

It's official. Bruce Springsteen will open his national tour at the Worcester Centrum on Feb. 25, with added dates Feb. 28 and 29. It is expected to be a "full-blown, big-sound rock 'n' roll tour", a CBS spokeswoman said yesterday.

Ticket information was not available last night, however. A meeting on the issue was held in Los Angeles late yesterday, but was not concluded at press time. More details are expected today, according to Centrum general manager Neil Sulkes.

Springsteen has said he might start his next tour in New England, but the surprise is that it will be at the Centrum -- not Boston Garden -- as has been rumored in recent weeks.

"It was a very competitive situation", Sulkes said. "We're not sure what tipped it our way. We used whatever corporate avenues we had. We think it's the result of some good negotiations and because Spectacor (the Centrum's management company, which also runs the Philadelphia Spectrum) carries a lot of weight in the industry."

For what is being dubbed "The Tunnel of Love Express Tour", Springsteen will bring his complete E Street Band and an additional five horn players, some of whom play with the New Jersey band, La Bamba & the Hubcaps.

"We believe it will be entirely different from Bruce's 'Born in the U.S.A."

tour", the CBS spokeswoman said. "There will be noteworthy exclusions of material as well as surprising additions. He may also play some new songs he's just written."

Although there's a two-day gap in the Centrum dates, don't expect more Centrum shows to be added. The intervening nights, Feb. 26 and 27, are booked with a truck pull competition. "It's just as well", said Sulkes. "From what we've heard, Bruce likes to start his tour, then have a night or two off to think about making changes."

Aside from the Centrum, the other tour dates so far are: March 3-4, Dean Smith Auditorium in Chapel Hill, NC; 8-9, Spectrum in Philadelphia; 13-14, Richfield Coliseum in Cleveland; 16-17, Rosemont Horizon in Chicago; 22-23, Omni in Atlanta; 26, Rupp Arena in Lexington, Ky.; 28-29, Joe Louis Arena in Detroit; April 1-2, Nassau Coliseum in Uniondale, NY; and 4-5, Capitol Center in Landover, Md. An additional month of dates is expected after that, mostly in the Western US
