---
title: "Steven Van Zandt Is Emerging As Artist On His Own Right"
author: "Steve Morse"
source: "Boston Globe"
date: "1987-05-17"
category: "Interview"
---

Steven Van Zandt was an integral link in Bruce Springsteen's E Street Band for more than 10 years. He left in 1984 before Springsteen took on a Zeus-like aura in the industry. But Van Zandt never looked back. He went on to make three solo albums and write the "Sun City" single to fight apartheid. He is at last being viewed as an artist in his own right, not just an E Street alumnus.

"When I left, Bruce did actually get bigger", Van Zandt said recently. "But at the time, don't forget, we were already very big. We were doing multiple arenas everywhere. We felt we had achieved success; and I was proud of it. At the point I left, it felt very natural. I just began to have other thoughts about needing to do something on my own -- and it's worked out quite well."

Little Steven, as he is known, doesn't yet have impressive record sales, but that may change with his new album, "Freedom -- No Compromise", to be released tomorrow on the Manhattan label. Its lyrics will further his image as a firebrand protest singer -- through songs about American Indians, Latin American fruit pickers and South African freedom fighters -- but the music is a broadly compelling mix of anthemic choruses and sweepingly upbeat rock 'n' roll.

"Sometimes I think people forget what I do for a living. I'm a rock 'n' roller and have a rock 'n' roll band. I'm not an investigative journalist", said Van Zandt, who was born in Boston but grew up on the New Jersey shore, where he was a highway construction worker before trying rock 'n' roll.

The new album contains duets with Grammy winner Ruben Blades (the two met during last summer's Amnesty International tour) and with former boss Springsteen, whom Van Zandt first met when playing in New Jersey bar bands.

"We don't get a chance to work with each other much anymore. But the time was right this time", Van Zandt said of Springsteen's collaboration on the reggae- tinged "Native American", which is about rebirth and dreams in a cynical society. Its most candid line: "You can't change me/Try and understand I am proud of who I am."

"Bruce is still a friend, even though the rest of the world thinks of him as this great big success", Van Zandt said during a recent phone interview.

"Believe me, I'm not trying to record with him because of the exposure it gives me. I don't expect the song we did together to be a hit."

Nevertheless, it will be interesting to see how radio reacts to Van Zandt's new music. He has been a critic's favorite ever since his hard-hitting "Voice of America" album in 1984, but radio has been reluctant to embrace him.

"The environment is changing -- certainly compared to 1984 when 'Voice of America' came out", he said. "That was really tough. Many people couldn't understand me. I'd go around criticizing the government and they'd say, 'Well, the economy is good.' But since 'Sun City' and Amnesty International and U2's success, I'm getting no negative reaction."

As is common for politically-minded rock singers, Van Zandt has been a much bigger star in Europe than in his homeland.

"Europeans have been with me since the beginning", he said. "In Sweden and Norway, 'Voice of America' was actually a hit -- a Top Ten record! Even in Germany and Italy, I do very well. And all through Holland, too. I've never had problems there. Politics is more of a day-to-day thing over there, which is what I'm writing about. I talk about justice and finding a common ground between cultures, which is what they do every day. We're more isolated over here. We don't have to speak a different language when we drive just an hour- and-a-half from our house."

Van Zandt is looking ahead to touring in late summer. He hasn't toured in three years, due mainly to his being wrapped up in 'Sun City', a consciousness-raising song and video project that urged entertainers to avoid playing the Sun City resort in South Africa.

"We accomplished that. No one is playing there anymore", he said. "But as musicians and artists, you can only point people to some extent. You can't make them all divest from South Africa. We did our job, and somebody else has to pick up the ball."
