---
title: "The Return Of The Boss"
author: "Steve Morse"
source: "Boston Globe"
date: "1988-02-21"
category: "Album Review"
---

Talk about a long and winding road.

His first albums in the early 1970s had a tuba and accordion on some tracks.

Absurdist beat poetry was mixed in with regional, street-smart tales of Jersey shore youth. There was little reason to predict that he was going to sell millions of records in the years to come and be ranked with the most respected artists of his era.

Bruce Springsteen, who opens his national tour with a three-night sellout at the Worcester Centrum beginning Thursday, has made only eight studio albums in 16 years -- but has already encompassed more musical styles than any of his competitors, except perhaps Bob Dylan and David Bowie.

A look back at Springsteen's music provides a glimpse of a singer perpetually in motion, refining high ideals born after viewing Elvis Presley and the Beatles on the Ed Sullivan show -- ideals that have led to a rarefied status as heart and soul of the Big Chill generation.

"Because of the naiveness of that era, it's easily trivialized and laughed at", Springsteen said of the '60s in an interview in Rolling Stone's 20th anniversary issue last year. "But underneath it, I think people were trying in some sense to redefine their own lives and the country that they lived in, in some more open and free and just fashion ...The values from that time are things that I still believe in."

Springsteen, the 38-year-old son of a Freehold, N.J., bus driver, has continually redefined his life through music. He has moved from an early bohemian fetish to a period as an ambitious star-struck rocker. He added later sidetrips as a stark country singer with a debt to Hank Williams; and a socially conscious folkie with a debt to Woody Guthrie.

His latest coup is "Tunnel of Love", a musically low-key, ballad-rich work that, despite its pleasant melodies, features an unblinking appraisal of the self-doubt involved in romance and other modern relationships.

"One of the things I wanted the record to be about is that we live in a society that wants us to buy illusion every day", Springsteen told Newsweek magazine last November. "That happens on a national scale, like Reagan telling us there are no hungry people here, just people who don't know where to go to get food. There's still that will to pretend that everything is OK. That I'm OK, and you're OK. That it's morning again in America. That happens on a personal level also. People are sold this every day: You're gonna live happily ever after. So when you do begin to feel conflict -- the natural human conflict that comes with any human relationship -- people have a tendency to repress it."

Few songwriters have written more thoughtfully about human conflict than Springsteen. Even back in the early '70s, when tuba, accordion and such exotica were heard in his heavily Dylan-influenced music, he cried out for honesty. "Walk tall, baby, or don't walk at all", he sang in "New York Serenade", a piano ballad on his second album, "The Wild, the Innocent & the E Street Shuffle" (1973).

Back then, however, most of Springsteen's pleas were couched in language that by his current standards was incomprehensible. Springsteen was then a fast- talking Jersey shore gypsy -- a real Asbury Park alleycat. "I was king of the alley, mama, I could talk some trash", he sang on his first album, "Greetings from Asbury Park" (1972). His melodies and shifting time signatures were dazzling, but he was trying to be a stream-of-conscious Beat poet a la Allen Ginsburg -- and he often sounded like a hippie who, as the saying went, had too much to dream last night.

"I took monthlong vacations in the stratosphere and you know it's really hard to hold your breath/ I swear I lost everything I ever loved or feared/ I was the cosmic kid in full costume dress", he sang on that first album. It also contained the song, "Does This Bus Stop at 82nd Street?" in which he went off the deep end with this rap about New York street people: "Wizard imps and sweat sock pimps, interstellar mongrel nymphs." At times, he sounded like Timothy Leary with a guitar.

But the following album, "The Wild, the Innocent & the E Street Shuffle", was full of promise, spanning Memphis horns and Latin congas and hinting at the revelatory soul-searching to come. It included a couple of classics he still performs on stage, "Rosalita (Come Out Tonight)" and "4th of July, Asbury Park (Sandy)." The latter, a bluesy ballad, included this patented Bruce-ism: "I got tired of hanging in these dusty arcades banging these pleasure machines/ Chased enough factory girls under the boardwalk."

Then came 1975's epic "Born to Run", with production help from Jon Landau, the former Boston Phoenix music critic who is now Springsteen's manager. The album will probably be on every Top 10 list from now until the apocalypse. It's a determinedly ambitious album ("I thought, 'I'm going to make the greatest rock 'n' roll record ever made', " he has said), and includes such rave-up standards as "Jungleland", "Tenth Avenue Freeze-Out" and "Thunder Road", with the pumping sax of Clarence Clemons and a memorable line about the explosive kinship of a hot-rodding automobile: "All the redemption I can offer, girl, is beneath this dirty hood."

Looking back, however, "Born to Run" is a great but stylized album. It won Springsteen a fanatical, arena-sized audience, but his songwriting didn't fully mature until his next two LPs, "Darkness on the Edge of Town" (1978) and "The River" (1980), which are arguably the two best albums of his career. They were born partly of pain -- Springsteen had been forced to stay off the road for two years during a nasty legal battle with ex-manager Mike Appel -- but that pain brought a stunning, new-found depth to his songwriting.

"I want to find one face that ain't looking through me", Springsteen sang in "Badlands", from the "Darkness" LP. He also learned the value of tension-and- release in his songs, building from stately organ lines by bandmate Danny Federici to razor-edged guitar by new member "Miami Steve" Van Zandt. The subsequent "River", a double LP, had some moments of frivolity ("Cadillac Ranch", "Sherry Darling"), but also some richly poignant numbers like "Independence Day" (about growing up and leaving his father's home) and "Point Blank", about a former girlfriend who falls into a welfare existence.

"I always wanted to live solidly in the present, always remember the past and always be planning for the future", Springsteen has said. "So from 'Darkness" to 'The River', I was attempting to pull myself into what I felt was going to be the adult world, so that when things became disorienting, I would be strong enough to hold my ground. Those were the records where I was trying to forge that foundation and maintain my connections and try to say, 'Well, what is this going to mean? Maybe what this is all going to mean is up to me.' "

By this time, Springsteen was a superstar who played two sellout nights at Boston Garden. But then came the roundhouse curve of "Nebraska" (1982), his Hank Williams/Woody Guthrie influenced acoustic album made on a four-track home tape recorder. Two of its songs, "Johnny 99" and "State Trooper", were laments for the common man and were covered by Johnny Cash. But the album doesn't stand the test of time that well. The problem is that several of the songs turned up in magnificent, band-accompanied versions on his last tour -- and after hearing them, one wishes they were on the LP.

After the "Nebraska' side trip, it was back to home run territory with the big-beat, arena-aimed "Born in the U.S.A." (1984), which sold 10 million copies and even brought Springsteen to the attention of President Reagan, who tried to make a jingoistic case for the title track, but was misled (and admonished by Springsteen), since the song was really about the alienation -- not chauvinism -- of a Vietnam veteran. Other songs, though, especially "Dancing in the Dark", created controversy only because Springsteen diehards wondered if he weren't going too far by writing such obviously commercial material.

Maybe that's a reason he responded with the new "Tunnel of Love" album. It is a gentle, thought-provoking work with no evident hit singles, though there have still been a few anyway, such as the painterly "Brilliant Disguise" and "Tunnel of Love", which featured a video in which Springsteen again strode along the Asbury Park boardwalk of his youth. It was a smart way of showing he hasn't forgotten his roots.

"I guess", Springsteen told Rolling Stone, "that when I started in music I thought, 'My job is pretty simple. My job is that I search for the human things in myself, and I turn them into notes and words. And then in some fashion, I help people hold on to their own humanity -- if I'm doing my job right."
