---
title: "He's Still On Fire Springsteen's Brilliant, Uneven New Album Finds Him Cherishing Love, Reckoning With Losses Of Sept. 11"
author: "Steve Morse"
source: "Boston Globe"
date: "2002-07-26"
category: "Album Review"
---

Bruce Springsteen is at another crossroads. His new album with the E Street Band finds him contemplating the devastation of Sept. 11, but also more familiar topics such as the bond of family, the comfort of faith, and the joys of partying. In other words, it's all over the place. It is brilliant at times and embarrassing at times. And while its ambition sometimes exceeds its grasp, it is still one of the most captivating records of the year. Titled "The Rising", it is Springsteen's first studio album with the E Street Band since 1987's "Tunnel of Love." Due out on Tuesday, it's 73 minutes long, and its 15 songs could easily have been split into two CDs. It might have made philosophical sense to do that - put the optimistic, party-style songs on one CD and the more socially conscious tracks on the other - but that was unlikely, as Springsteen's last attempt at releasing two CDs simultaneously ("Human Touch" and "Lucky Town" in 1992) was a commercial failure.

Instead, Springsteen fans will have to weave through the peaks and valleys of a single marathon album that eventually reconfirms the Boss's genius, but only after some bumpy moments that could have been edited out without losing much.

Into that category falls the mushy "Waitin' on a Sunny Day" ("gonna chase the clouds away"), which sounds like routine bubble-gum pop from Phil Spector's heyday; and the gooey "Mary's Place" ("Meet me at Mary's place, we're gonna have a party"), which sounds like an outtake from the boxed set of outtakes that Springsteen released a few years ago.

That said, the album touches the soul much more often than not. The Sept. 11 songs are no-holds-barred odes that draw on the pain Springsteen felt when his Monmouth County, N.J., home area lost 150 lives to the attacks on the World Trade Center. The poignant, cello- enhanced "You're Missing" has Springsteen sadly singing, "Your house is waiting for you, but you're missing... children are asking if it's all right, will you be in our arms tonight?" And the country- bluesy "Into the Fire" is a tribute to the firefighters who perished in the tragedy: "I heard you calling, but you disappeared into the dust upstairs, into the fire." Then comes this gospel-inspired chorus: "May your strength give us strength/May your faith give us faith/May your hope give us hope."

A number of the new songs rock (with guitarist Steve Van Zandt playing a forceful role), but again there's a balancing act of emotions. Sonically, the opening track, "Lonesome Day", could fit onto Springsteen's anthemic "Born in the U.S.A." album of 1984, yet lyrically, it clearly references Sept. 11: "Let kingdom come, I'm gonna find my way through this lonesome day." But then there's the arena-rocking "Further On (Up the Road)", which was written before the attacks and is more quintessential Springsteen: "So let's take the good times as they go, and I'll meet you further on up the road."

To hear sound clips from "The Rising", visit [www.boston.com/](http://www.boston.com/) globe/living.

Whether you're a Springsteen diehard or not, there are a half- dozen outstanding tracks that affirm his Dylan-of-his-generation credentials. "Empty Sky" is a stunning achievement. Yet another allusion to the World Trade Center aftermath, it opens with elegiac piano from Roy Bittan, gives way to stately acoustic guitar, then sears the heart with its dual yearning for love ("I want a kiss from your lips") and vengeance ("I want an eye for an eye").

Two other gems break new artistic ground. The song "Worlds Apart" combines a piercing, Neil Young-ish guitar solo with vocals in the qawwali style (music of Islamic Sufi mystics) from Asif Ali Khan. It also breaks new lyrical ground, as Springsteen refers to a Muslim seeking love (" 'neath Allah's rain, we remain worlds apart"), though he seems out of his element here. But the real standout is "The Fuse", which merges tape-looped drums and vocals (has Springsteen been listening to William Orbit?) for the most adventurous track here. It moves from ominous imagery (a funeral procession) to the joys of lovemaking in spite of it all: "On the edge of the bed you slip off your blouse/the room is burning with the noon sun/Your bittersweet taste on my tongue."

The overall message of the album, amid its many schizoid turns, is that Springsteen continues to crave intimacy despite the psychic dislocation brought on by Sept. 11. In the classic R&B-style "Let's Be Friends (Skin to Skin)", which also has a nice sax solo from Clarence Clemons, Springsteen sings, "The time is now, maybe we could get skin to skin/Don't know when this chance might come again."

One can only wonder what this album would have been like without the urgency of Sept. 11. Springsteen sometimes tries too hard to comment on the events (and sounds stilted), but while this isn't the best album of his career, it's still good enough to be a must-listen for believers.
