---
title: "The Boss' Lines Were Busy; Calls For Springsteen Tickets; Disrupt Phone Service In Washington"
author: "Adam Pertman"
source: "Boston Globe"
date: "1985-07-23"
category: "News"
---

What does it take to jam up the telephone lines of the nation's capital to the point where it's not worth even trying to make a call?

"Mother's Day and Christmas, holidays like that. And disasters like heavy snowstorms or the plane crash into the Potomac three years ago", said a spokesman for the local telephone company. "And now this."

From just after 10 a.m. until almost noon yesterday, so many fans were calling a local 800 number to buy tickets to an upcoming Bruce Springsteen concert that business - at least for those who depend on the phone - slowed to a crawl.

It took a few attempts for many callers in Washington, eastern Maryland and Richmond, Va., to get a dial tone, and even then many local calls did not get through.

That was nothing, though, compared to what the circuit congestion did to long- distance calling - in and out of the city. No dial tones, for example. Or dial tones that wouldn't go away. Or, when calling from out of town, nonstop busy signals.

For purposes of comparison, Lowell Connor, a spokesman for AT&T, cited figures for the peak hour yesterday and for a typical Monday morning. Between 10:30 and 11:30 last week, he said, 858,000 calls went through the three switches that handle long-distance for the Baltimore-Washington area. Yesterday the number exceeded 2 million.

"We just didn't anticipate it", he said. "If there's a major disaster, we know what we'll be having to deal with....But who could have known this would happen for a rock 'n' roll concert?"

The last time the circuits were blocked like this, Connor said, was when an Air Florida jet crashed into the 14th Street Bridge in 1982. And the Associated Press quoted Charles B. Overly Jr., director of the Pentagon's telecommunications center, as saying during the jam-up: "One guy over at the telephone company just told us the switching center is tied up about the way it was when (President John F.) Kennedy was assassinated."

More than 53,000 tickets to the Springsteen concert were put on sale at 10 a.m. yesterday. An hour and a half later, they were gone. Some fans had been camped out since last Friday at Robert F. Kennedy Stadium, where the concert will be held Aug. 5, for the chance to lay down $18.50 per seat.

The Washington show will be the first in a nine-week US tour by Springsteen, following his sold-out dates at concerts across Europe, Japan and Australia.

Tickets for the second stop in the United States, Cleveland, are already gone; 65,000 seats were sold out in just over three hours on Saturday. Promoters estimate that when the American leg of the tour ends 3 million people will have paid to see the man nicknamed The Boss.

Local businesses contacted yesterday said they had been inconvenienced by the disruption of phone service, but most took it with good humor. "You'd never think a rock star would cause so many problems", said an employee at one travel agency. "I guess he must be pretty good."

AT&T might have underestimated Springsteen's popularity this time, but Connor said it won't happen again; when tickets go on sale in Chicago, the third stop on the tour, the long-distance company will be ready.

"We can reprogram the computers if we know it's coming", he said, "and we'll certainly learn from this experience."
