---
title: "Why they call him Boss — no drugs, not much drink, just hard graft, reveals this life of Bruce Springsteen"
author: "Nick Rufford"
source: "The Times"
date: "2012-11-11"
category: "Book Review"
---

Bruce by Peter Ames Carlin

It is hard to believe that it’s nearly 40 years since Bruce Springsteen released his first album. Fans who grew up listening to his songs will wonder where the years went. Some 120m album sales later he’s still going strong, completing a marathon world tour and appearing at election ­rallies in support of President Obama. Now 63, he must be mindful that the clock is ticking, though. Two of his ­longest-serving band members have died — his accordionist from cancer and Clarence Clemons, his saxophonist, from a stroke. Perhaps that’s why he has ­co-operated on this biography by the music critic Peter Ames Carlin. “There’s nothing like an oncoming train to focus the mind,” Springsteen said recently.

It is a painstakingly researched book and based on — for the first time — interviews with Springsteen’s family and friends as well as with the Boss himself. To that extent it is the first authorised account for a decade. It sweeps through a career that began with Springsteen singing Twist and Shout at the Elks Club in Freehold, New Jersey, and ended in ­stadium shows and megastardom.

There is no shortage of detail. Carlin even tracked down the patrolman who was first on the scene of Springsteen’s 1968 motorcycle crash that left him injured and ineligible for military conscription. What distinguishes this account from recent books such as those by Pete Townshend and Keith Richards is the absence of the usual rock’n’roll ingredients. Springsteen’s father often consumed a six-pack of beer nightly, which gave Springsteen an enduring aversion to drugs and excessive drink. When he once went backstage and found one of his musicians holding a cocaine spoon up the nose of another he jumped on the individual straight away, snarling: “If I ever f**\*\*** see this again, I don’t care who it is, they’re gone, on the spot — fired.”

As well as the highlights, Carlin does a good job of spelling out the humdrum, including Springsteen’s periods of isolation while he was song-writing, when days often consisted of getting up, eating Cheerios, walking on the beach or boardwalk and tinkering at the piano or acoustic guitar. There is enough good material to overcome Carlin’s sometimes chaotic style — a problem that a good editor could have sorted out by chopping up long sentences and elucidating puzzling points.

Other rock stars of Springsteen’s ­vintage have commissioned ghostwritten autobiographies to put their own gloss on things. Instead, this is a warts-and-all account that includes Springsteen’s flashes of temper when things didn’t go his way. The book’s publicity blurb promises “little-known tales” of his father’s mental illness, the evening Bruce was nearly shot dead in his family’s home and the soft-porn movie he appeared in. These turn out to be damp squibs. If anything, the strength of Carlin’s account is in unravelling some of the folklore. Springsteen’s sister, for instance, recalls that his famous rows with their father, often cited as the source of his angst and creativity, were typical dad-teenage son stuff. “[Dad] wanted Bruce’s hair short and he wanted it long. Maybe to us it wasn’t that big a deal, but obviously to Bruce it was.”

Springsteen’s first manager and producer, Mike Appel, with whom he had an acrimonious split, is refreshingly portrayed not as a typical record-industry villain but as a hard-working manager who fell out with the Boss over irreconcilable business differences. Overall, Springsteen emerges well — a self-taught musician from an unexceptional background with an exceptional talent. What set him apart, according to Carlin, was his single-mindedness. Other band members took jobs in boatyards and on construction sites to pay the bills, but Springsteen refused to be distracted, preferring to eke out a few dollars playing in dives, scraping along on just enough for his junk-food fixes and for the rent.

He spent six months honing the title song of Born to Run, his breakthrough album, labouring over every syllable of the lyrics, then threw the finished acetate (first copy) of the record into a swimming pool because he thought it sounded dreadful. Springsteen says about himself: “I’m the most committed person I’ve ever run up against.”

That same grittiness earned him the nickname the Boss and a reputation as a hard-ass. One night the lead singer of a rival New Jersey group turned up at a gig to find that the rest of his band had defected to join a then up-and-coming Springsteen. An audience member yelled at the unfortunate musician: “What instrument do you play?” He shrugged in defeat and replied, “second fiddle”.
