---
title: "Bruce Almighty"
author: "Greg Dyke"
source: "The Observer"
date: "2005-04-24"
category: "Commentary"
---

'I love Springsteen because he always captures the mood of the time"

The arrival of a new Springsteen album is always a major event in my life. By complete coincidence, it always seems to mark a new phase or a new time for me, especially when it is accompanied by the chance to see the great man himself on tour.

My mind is littered with memories of Springsteen albums and the Springsteen concerts which invariably accompany them. The first, for me, was at Wembley, way back in 1981, soon after my marriage broke up, followed a few years later with Bruce opening up with 'Independence Day' at the Born in the USA concert at Wembley Stadium, which just happened to be scheduled on American Independence Day. Then there was the Tom Joad concert at the Albert Hall in 1996, when I went with just my seven-year-old son. He still claims he saw Springsteen that night, even though he slept in my arms throughout the whole concert. Or Springsteen at Earls Court in '99 on the day I was interviewed by the governors of the BBC for the director-general's job. I remember explaining to them I had to be away by seven, as some things are not to be missed. I saw the concert and got the job.

In truth, Springsteen has been part of my life for more than a quarter of a century and although he's younger than me I somehow feel we have grown old together, with his music reflecting the two areas of music - rock and folk - which have dominated my musical tastes.

So what is it about Springsteen which makes him quite so special for the likes of me? Somehow, on every new album, there's always a track or two which manage to capture the mood of the time and they always come from his own left-of- centre perspective. I was proud when he sent money to the miners during the great miners' strike, when he led the concert after 9/11 and when he toured the country opposing the re-election of George Bush. Somehow, I felt he represented me.

I don't know him, I've never met him but I do believe he's real and genuine, that he does sympathise with people in adversity - the illegal immigrant, the displaced industrial worker, the people whose lives were destroyed by 9/11 or now, on the latest album, the soldier going to Iraq.

I need to play a new Springsteen album at least 20 times before I can really appreciate it. I need the journeys alone in the car late at night with Springsteen blasting out before I can truly work out which I think are the outstanding new songs. So all I can say of Devils & Dust is that it's from the Tom Joad tradition, that the title song is haunting and that Mary, who is usually to be found in at least one song on every album, is replaced by Maria.

But, in truth, all I really need to say is that it's the new Springsteen album. That's enough.
