---
title: "One of the best shows EVER! Madison Square Garden - New York, NY - Sun, Nov 8, 2009"
author: "donnakny"
source: "Ticketmaster"
date: "2009-11-08"
category: "Concert Review"
---

Note: Credited to Vancouver Sun, but couldn't find it there. However, I did find parts of this on a Ticketmaster review comment section.

As a performer, Bruce Springsteen never disappoints. Last night, he and the E-Street Band reached back to their roots with a performance of The River that literally shook Madison Square Garden. I am not exaggerating when I say the ground moved beneath my feet! I 've seen Bruce and the boys more than fifty times since 1977 and I can honestly say that I have never- repeat NEVER- seen a better Bruce Springsteen concert than this extraordinary show.

Bruce has always known how to pace a concert and, as an album, The River follows that expert pacing. Last night's show featured lots of rollicking music interspersed with a more contemplative tune here and there to let you catch your breath....or get up and take a bathroom break! And the songs were played so God damn tight ! Some of the River cuts are played rarely but it never showed. The absolute highlight was a chilling performance of " Stolen Car" , Bruce bathed in a soft light intoning-

_"..Each night I wait to get caught.......but I never do"_

When they finished performing The River, the band played for at least another hour. The entire show was 3 hours and 15 minutes, bringing us back to the good old days when a Springsteen concert never ended before midnight. The encore went on forever, with a mix of Springsteen tunes such as Waiting on a Sunny Day, Badlands, No Surrender and...do I even have to speak its name....Born to Run, as well as the old Sweet Soul Music, Can't Help Falling In Love and (Your Love is Taking Me) Higher and Higher.

An amazing show from an amazing group of performers, led by The Boss- an E Street Band concert that will be remembered for the ages.

Opening act(s): There's no time for an opening act at a Springsteen show!
