---
title: "Wrestling With Demons in a Hotel Tryst"
author: "Kelefa Sanneh"
source: "The New York Times"
date: "2005-05-19"
category: "Concert Review"
---

Note: Published 2005-05-21

EAST RUTHERFORD, N.J., May 19 - Bruce Springsteen wanted everyone to know that the next song would be a "love song." He paused and then clarified, "But it doesn't go that well." It does, however, go pretty far. The song was "Reno", which may already be the most talked-about thing on his quiet but fervent new album, "Devils & Dust" (Columbia). The song takes place in a hotel room, and the narrator is out on the sort of date that begins with a menu. "Two hundred dollars straight in", his companion tells him, though it turns out there's also a way to spend $50 more.

Maybe that's what the recorded voice on the loudspeakers meant when it promised concertgoers an intimate evening. After the clatter and optimism of those pro-Kerry rallies last fall, Mr. Springsteen has returned to the road for a series of almost-solo shows (those atmospheric synthesizer sounds must have come from somewhere) largely devoted to "Devils & Dust." At the beginning of Thursday night's performance at the theater at the Continental Airlines Arena (the same old hockey rink, bisected by a curtain), he announced, "I can use as much quiet as I can get." He got as much as his fans could bear to give.

All right, back to that hotel room, site of one of the most titillating scenes in the Springsteen songbook. The only thing standing between the audience and unadulterated voyeuristic excitement was, of course, the singer himself, who absolutely oozes decency. Hearing Mr. Springsteen sing about a man and a woman exchanging cash and fluids is a bit like looking at nude photographs with an incorrigibly high-minded art instructor: you try to think mature thoughts, hoping he doesn't catch you staring at the naughty bits.

That decency is a heavy weight, and perhaps no rock star less sturdy than Mr.

Springsteen (and are there any more sturdy?) could hope to carry it. His new album isn't nearly as gloomy as its most similar predecessor, the 1995 "Ghost of Tom Joad", though it's also not as consistent as the beloved "Nebraska."

Still, the best songs, like "Reno", are keenly observed and relatively unsentimental. As Mr. Springsteen promised, the assignation in the hotel room "doesn't go that well", but the lyrics only hint at shame and despair. You hear more about what happens in the narrator's pants than about what happens in his head.

Mr. Springsteen sang some songs seated at a piano, and it wasn't the best way to hear him; the piano songs were among the low points. One of these was a treacly version of "The Wish", a mother-and-son narrative that he prefaced with a charming apology: "Singing about your mother is risky in my business", he said, though he allowed that a few performers (including Tupac Shakur) had done it well.

All night, the somber songs on "Devils & Dust" inspired Mr. Springsteen to add long, witty remarks between songs that verged on stand-up comedy. He went on a rant about the controversy over teaching evolution: "The president says that the jury's out on evolution", he said, then added, "Here in New Jersey, we're counting on it." More than once, he mentioned that some relatives were in the audience; if he was rattled, it only helped.

As he proved last year, Mr. Springsteen isn't afraid to risk alienating his audience. The night's second song was a radical version of "Reason to Believe", arranged as a blues song and sung through a microphone so wildly distorted that many fans didn't recognize it until the second chorus. And the concert ended the way many concerts on this tour have ended, with an incantatory cover of "Dream Baby Dream" by the pioneering electronic duo Suicide - hardly a song this crowd knew by heart.

Watching Mr. Springsteen struggle under the weight of his own decency, watching him chronicle characters shuttling between hard times and hard-won joy, it's easy to see why so many rock stars avoid decency altogether. That commitment to goodness can have a flattening effect, turning songs into allegories and singers into figureheads; Mr. Springsteen's least convincing songs seem to go on forever as he rasps about stock characters nobly struggling to survive.

But let's return, one last time, to the hotel room where one of Mr.

Springsteen's more memorable narrators spends two and a half verses hearing a price list, daydreaming about an old lover and - finally, anticlimactically - getting down to business. There is a lot to love about Mr. Springsteen's commitment to decency, which lets him get through the naughty bits without smirking, to find whatever it is that lies on the other side.

In "Reno", the encounter ends with a celebration that isn't, and Mr.

Springsteen sang it the way he sang many of these songs: in a gruff whisper that echoed his characters' disappointment. " Here's to the best you ever had", the woman says, and then the narrator recalls: "We laughed and made a toast/It wasn't the best I ever had/Not even close." Mr. Springsteen was still strumming when he delivered that last line, but it didn't matter. The crowd promptly obliterated the quiet he had asked for, and he didn't complain.
