---
title: "Growin' Up And Rockin' Out"
author: "Peter Watrous"
source: "The New York Times"
date: "1987-07-05"
category: "Book Review"
---

GLORY DAYS Bruce Springsteen in the 1980s. By Dave Marsh. Illustrated. 478 pp.

New York: Pantheon Books. $18.95.

HERE we are, not even through the decade, and Dave Marsh has already written a book with the subtitle "Bruce Springsteen in the 1980s."

Springsteen: he's an honorable topic. A man who once exemplified intelligent, passionate rock-and-roll - and therefore secured himself a position as a medium-sized draw and a resonant cultural figure for those who follow rock - Springsteen has blossomed into the sort of icon and political symbol Madison Avenue craves and, in his case, exploits. Five million people shelled out $100 million to see his last tour in 1985 - the biggest in rock history - and he simultaneously pulled in two disingenuous requests for political endorsements, from both the Reagan and the Mondale sides, and inspired a slew of sound/look- alike advertisements.

Mr. Marsh has taken his subtitle too seriously, though, as if it gave him the license to drag us through everything the man did between 1981 and the release last November of "Bruce Springsteen and the E Street Band Live/1975-1985", a marathon five-record set. Author of the best-selling 1979 biography of Springsteen, "Born to Run", Mr. Marsh takes a couple of different routes to get to "The Boss." Part fan deep-breathing ("The cameras loved Bruce outside, too", he writes of outdoor concerts), part close analysis of the lyrics, part political explication, the book is also part daily journal. The end result is a hagiography, and a dull one at that. Mr. Marsh's "Glory Days" presents Springsteen as a torn figure, someone uncomfortable with moving into the highest rank of stardom. Early in his career, he shied away from performing in big stadiums, finding them too impersonal, and Mr. Marsh admires that dedication to his audience. He avoided merchandising himself and rarely gave interviews. He bravely released a solo acoustic album, "Nebraska", risking his popularity. And importantly, he updated the rock- and-roll archetype by becoming an adult and still rocking out.

But Springsteen changed, and the change forces Mr. Marsh to hustle as an apologist. Under the tutelage of his manager, Jon Landau - the book could easily have been titled "The Education of Bruce Springsteen", as Mr. Landau, a former rock critic for Rolling Stone, feeds him books, movies and political thinking -Springsteen begins playing the largest venues possible. According to Mr. Marsh, "He needed the artistic challenge the vast spaces of the football fields afforded." He starts giving interviews to "Entertainment Tonight" and People, since "the already wobbly rock press had further deteriorated."

He allows himself to be merchandised: "Bruce had accepted the need for selling his concertgoers some sort of merchandise, noting the demand of his audience for even the low-grade junk sold in the streets around his shows by 't-shirt bootleggers.' " He tries to cultivate a black audience for his work; that he can't obviously damages Springsteen's credibility as the great American pop culture figure, and Mr. Marsh spends a solid three pages mulling that one over. BUT the most amazing thing about

Springsteen's later career - and Mr. Marsh sees this and rightly admires him for it - is his ability to maintain his identity and to keep his extraordinary communication with the audience. Mr. Marsh likes the newfound success for another reason: Springsteen's populist stance reaches more people, fitting the myth of the homespun hero. He rakes in endorsements from George Will to Bill Bradley, making me figure that perhaps his message wasn't as pointed and efficacious as it might be.

The book sells itself as an inside look at Springsteen, and in a sense it is.

Jon Landau is a good friend of Dave Marsh and a business associate of Mr.

Marsh's wife. This gives Mr. Marsh - who's up front about all of this - an insider's perspective, but it leaves me wondering about what I'm reading. Fame is a dance with the devil in the record industry, and it can make people - even as good a soul as Springsteen - become contorted. Mr. Marsh's whitewashing is tedious; the connection makes it suspect as well.

A less sanitized version of Springsteen's trek may not be written for a few years. By then the story might not make any difference - in which case Mr.

Marsh, by laying out a cardboard, mythologized version of Springsteen, has done a disservice not only to us, but to Springsteen as well.
