---
title: "The Original Wrecking Ball: Bruce Springsteen's 'Nebraska'"
author: "Ian Crouch"
source: "The New Yorker"
date: "2012-03-06"
category: "Album Review"
subcategory: "Wrecking Ball"
---

Bruce Springsteen's seventeenth studio album, "Wrecking Ball", has landed. It pairs some musical experimentation---tape loops, samples, a bit of rapping (not by the Boss, thankfully, but by the gospel singer Michelle Moore)---with familiar Springsteen lyrical iconography: American flags, steel wheels, shuttered factories, and suitcases packed for a quick escape. Springsteen told Rolling Stone that "the record basically started out as folk music---just me and a guitar singing these songs", before he began working with producer Ron Aniello on a more eclectic and anthemic sound. In the same interview, Springsteen also said: "This is as direct a record as I ever made. That's with the possible exception of 'Nebraska', which this record has a lot in common with."

Let's see. This January marked the thirtieth anniversary of the recording of "Nebraska", one of the more mythical events in pop-music history. Over the course of several days at his home in Colts Neck, New Jersey, and armed principally with a guitar, harmonica, and glockenspiel, Springsteen laid down what he thought were demos for a new album that he'd record with the E Street Band. That album never got made; after rehearsals with the full band, Springsteen, his manager, Jon Landau, and others decided that the lyrics---about murder, hard luck, regret, and father-and-son strife---were better served by the low-fi originals. What emerged on "Nebraska" was a hushed, thin, and stark sound, which, because of its provenance, seemed almost divinely inspired.

Accordingly, the device that captured the sound, a Tascam Portastudio 144 tape recorder, has become a kind of holy object among fans. The album's lyrics, meanwhile, seem drawn from a harrowing and unnervingly gorgeous hell right here on earth.

In "Heart of Darkness: Bruce Springsteen's Nebraska", a new history of the album, published this past December, David Burke connects its themes to the political and economic climate that marked the early Reagan years. Springsteen has said that Reagan's election startled him into a newfound political consciousness. Burke quotes a Springsteen interview in which the Boss said that "Nebraska" was about the loss of community and "spiritual breakdown", times and places when people "just get shot off somewhere where nothing seems to matter." Among the album's story songs, murder ballads, confessions, and deathbed laments are plenty of sociological markers. Bad prices have killed the family farm. The bank is about to take the house. Vietnam vets have been screwed from all sides. Someone closed the auto plant in Mahwah.

The economy was lousy in 1982, and it's lousy today, at least for the people who appear in Springsteen songs. "Wrecking Ball" is also filled with criminals, but they aren't the outcasts and the misfits that populate "Nebraska." This time, they are members of the one per cent. And, while "Nebraska" tells plaintive, first-person stories, most of the songs on "Wrecking Ball" are thematic rather than narrative---fables about the capital- letter ideas of Politics, the Economy, and the State of the Union. With its proud liberal populism and wide sampling of the national musical melting pot, "Wrecking Ball" is a big-tent vision of America. It may be an imperfect and deeply unfair place, but it's still a party. And perhaps a hootenany will help sort things out. (It's fitting that Obama included the album's first single, "We Take Care of Our Own" on his campaign playlist on Spotify.)

If "Wrecking Ball" is the big top, then "Nebraska" is the freak show. Burke's book is informative, but it places too much emphasis on the songs as cultural commentary; they are about something deeply sinister. Sissy Spacek's affectless narration in the Terrence Malick movie "Badlands" inspired the album's title track, told from the man's perspective, which opens: "I saw her standin' on her front lawn, just a-twirlin' her baton. / Me and her went for a ride, sir, and ten innocent people died." The prairie edge continues with the screechy yodel that kicks off "Johnny 99." And the chilling shriek that ends "State Trooper." Springsteen was reading Flannery O'Connor at the time. The album is shot through with the real possibility of an evil that transcends circumstance, what O'Connor writes about in the story "A Good Man is Hard to Find": "Then it's nothing for you to do but enjoy the few minutes you got left the best way you can---by killing somebody or burning down his house or doing some other meanness to him. No pleasure but meanness."

"Nebraska" may be an anomaly in Springsteen's career rather than a signpost. (Stephen Metcalf, writing at Slate, once called it "the only record you can push on the nonbelievers.") It doesn't offer signs of hope, redemption, or community. There's no "we" anywhere in it. It's nihilistic in its philosophy, and agnostic in its politics. Perhaps most importantly, the album, in its tightly controlled sound and theme, resists the power of Springsteen's outsized personality and his immense power to entertain. There has often been a dissonance between Bruce Springsteen's music and the content of his lyrics.

It's why "Born in the U.S.A."---a deeply anti-American song---gets played at Tea Party rallies. The big political numbers on "Wrecking Ball" may have started as folk songs, and they look serious on paper, but they'll be heard beneath the bright lights of stadiums, and most likely this fall at the Democratic National Convention in Charlotte, North Carolina. "Nebraska", meanwhile, is about a different kind of politics, and should be heard in the dark.