---

title: "Interview With Carol Miller"
author: "Carol Miller"
source: "WPLJ"
date: "1978-09-15"
category: "Interview"
--- (After the show at The Palladium on 9/15/78)

Q#1 - Carol: Welcome back Bruce, let me ask you, which did you like better - The Palladium or the Garden?

Bruce: I like them both, it's, it's, it's uh, it's a little different, it's not that different to tell you the truth, you know, it's like people'll think that uh, it's, it's it's not really that different. The Garden was real exciting because ... 'cause it was like the Garden and we never played there and like, you sorta, it's funny because I didn't think that I would be that excited about it or something, you know, and like, 'cause we've been playing, like the Garden is, I don't know, our 60th show or something. We'd been playing a long time. We played some big places out west and stuff and I didn't think that I'd, you know, feel that different about it but we got there ... and everybody ... was liked wiped about, about being there or something, you know, it was like, it was sorta like well, you know, this is like a big deal, you know. This is like something, you know, something special or something so, and I found like uh, like the band, with people like nervous and like can never, you know, normally not that nervous, you know, everybody was uh, uh, it was uh, it was, it was really something in their whole line, that was like the response we got from the crowd was fantastic there. Like it was, my favorite New York shows ever, you know, it was like, uh, it was just real, it was real satisfying, you know, it was real, uh, it was just terrific you know. Having been away and come back and, and, and get that kind of, you know, response from the crowd, it was just really, it was great. I just want to thank everybody that was there for making it like, you know, it's like, it was fantastic, it was the best (?) of my life or something (chuckles).

Q#2 - Carol: Well, I'll you, I remember when you used to say you didn't want to play the Garden or a big hall like that. Why did you change your mind?

Bruce: There's a lot of reasons plus, the thing if you're carrying, like I've got 25 people that come around with me, and you know, it costs a whole lot of money just to walk out and play at night, you know, and like with the amount of people I got right now, to walk out, to do it, it's impossible, you know, it's, it's very, to, to make money, doing, playing in a theatre almost, you know, or it's real, real hard, you know. And 'cause if you can try and keep you're best, you know, it can cost, it costs, it costs a lot of dough and stuff, you know, so, it was good 'cause we did Philadelphia, you know, and it worked out. It was like a test, you know a test, market down there sorta and it worked out so good that we started playing them in different parts of the country, you know. And New York was the last, like practically like the last place we did one, you know, and that was like ...it was really the cumul(ation) it was really, ah man, it was like, I was just, I had a great time all 3 nights there. We left, everybody was like, it was funny, everybody was beat, the bus caught on fire (chuckles) the day we left, you know, and like, we drove, I think, to New Haven, which was the first place we played after that, and it looked like a wasteland.

Q#3 - Carol: Some of our listeners may not know why you waited three years, do, do you mind going into that a little bit before putting out the latest album?

Bruce: Oh, I took up gardening (chuckles). I always wanted to lay around a little bit and relax. No, I was in a, a lawsuit which uh, you know, tied everything up for a couple years, and then it took about 11 months to make the record, you know, so that really stretched it out there, but uh, those were the events.

Q#4 - Carol: Well, this record has kind of a more Americana feeling than, let's say, New York, New Jersey. Did you kind of expand your uh, frame of reference in it? Is that what you did?

Bruce: Just a little bit, you know, just a little bit, uh, it wasn't as New York as the other records, you know, and uh, which is good because I felt it was more me in the other records in a certain way, you know, uh, just the little ( cows ?) and stuff, a lot of it was more, that came more from a small town, you know. For 18 years, I grew up in a little town and uh, ...uh, I was coming into the city a lot since I was 16. I used to come in and play down at the Cafe Wha?, which I don't think is even, I don't know if it's there anymore or not...

Carol: No, it's a middle east restaurant.

Bruce: It is?

Carol: Yeah!

Bruce: Wow! But I used to go there and play. When I was just, when I was 16, I'd play there in the summertime, like in the matinees and stuff, you know, and so I was coming in a lot from that period on, you know, and then when I was making the first album, I was in New York all the time. I was playing at Max's all by myself with an acoustic guitar and hangin' around and stuff, and I creeped in, uh, quite a bit to the first, you know, to the first few albums there. This is album is a little more ...you know, a little more, uh, like where I grew up and actually like where I live now, you know. It's still, it's still like that a lot so, I was interested in just writing about that, you know, it wasn't as uh, urban and stuff.

Q#5 - Carol: What's the story behind Badlands? That's the uh, the latest release off the LP. Do you have a particular story that goes with why you wrote that song or how you wrote the song?

Bruce: Naw, no, let me think, uh (chuckles), it was, initially it was gonna be like the title of the album at one time. I thought it was something I was gonna use maybe, and a friend of mine put an album out with it, yeah, Billy put it out with uh, with uh, with a song with that title, you know, uh, this song, I just started jamming in the studio one night. I had that riff (Bruce sings it), you know, and uh, we just, we put the track down with no words or anything, it was just uh, we threw some chords together, and uh, we had the track for a long, long time, you know, and I had the track and I had like the title lines, "Badlands, you gotta live it everyday', you know, that chorus line, and uh, I was at home and I wrote the rest (chuckles). It's always the worst part, you know.

Q#6 - Carol: Do people recognize you in the street in New York?

Bruce: Not too much, you know, once in a while, you know, uh, once in a while someone will come up to me and go ...'AL PACINO!' (Bruce & Carol break out laughing hysterically) ...You know, it's like, you know, I go 'Naw, naw, naw, naw, naw, wrong guy' you know. But uh, once in a while, you know, people come up to me and say 'Hello'. This girl comes up to me, where was I? I was in Chicago. She's got a big bandage on her chin. And she comes up to me, she says, 'Bruce, how ya doin? I did this at your show. Right? I said, 'Well, what happened?' She says, 'Well I was standing up clapping in the back and it was so hot.' I guess she passed out, fell over on her face, you know, it was like, you know, it's like, 'I'm sorry', what do you say?, you know, it's like, 'Yeah, I passed out. They had to carry me out.', you know, '(?) was great."

Said, 'I had a good time. I got, I got a little scar', she says now. I always remember that show, you know, but it was funny, so I was, I was (?) recognizable. At home, sometimes a little bit, you know, uh, once in a while, not that much, you know, I don't like have any particular, uh, used to be people would recognize, like my beard or recognize, my hair or my hat or my jacket but nobody really recognized my face (chuckles)."

Q#7 - Carol: What's in the future for you? Let me just, get back to the music, you know, a live album?

Bruce: Naw, oh, well if things they do goes okay, uh ...we're either gonna, uh, go back out on tour, starting November 1st, so New Year's, that's a possibility, or else we're gonna, if we didn't do that, we'd start making another record, you know, 'cause I don't want it to be such a long time again, you know, and it takes me a while, just to collect the songs, and that was the thing about the last time, there was a lot of writing done in the studio ... and it just takes time, you know, it takes more time that way, and uh, uh, so, I'll probably either go back out on tour starting November 1st or start another album, you know. If we do go out on tour, we'd start another record in uh, February, you know.

Closing - Carol: Well, listen, I don't want to take up anymore of your time but I want to say 'thank you' for myself and everyone at WPLJ and all the listeners because, uh, you know, everybody just loves you and - the best live performer in the world.

Bruce: Thanks, Carol, thanks. You know, I just want to say 'thanks' for like, uh, 'cause way back when we weren't as popular as (chuckle) we are right now, Carol was playing, playing our records, you know, so, I just want to say 'thanks a lot."

Carol: Well, you're welcome.

Bruce: Alright (chuckles)

=============================================================

JIMMY IOVINE w/ CAROL MILLER (Afternoon on 9/15/78)

<Lead in is about Bruce's demo of Because The Night>

Q#1 - Carol: That's Bruce doing it, and this afternoon I, uh, spoke with my friend, JImmy Iovine, who took time out from recording with Tom Petty here in New York City [Damn The Torpedoes album], and uh, Jimmy is the producer of the Patti Smith version of that song, the Easter album, and also, he is the engineer working with Bruce and Jon Landau on a lot of Bruce's stuff. Jimmy has an explanation of uh, that particular version. What's the story of this Because The Night take that we have with Bruce Springsteen singing it?

Jimmy: What you just finished playing was uh, one of the demos that we recorded the first day of Darkness. Bruce recorded all of the songs that he had written up to date and we spent about 2 hours laying a very rough demo of all of the songs and that's one of them.

Carol: Now, how did this tape get out?

Jimmy: Well, when I gave a cassette of the demo tape to Patti to distribute it to her band for them to learn the song, uh, someone stole that out of the guitar player's house [Assuming Lenny Kay here] and that's how it got on the street. That's probably about a 5th or 6th generation you got there.

Carol: So, in other words, we just played stolen property?

Jimmy: That's about right.

Carol: Well.

Q#2 - Carol: Let me change the subject. How come you recorded Because The Night with Patti Smith?

Jimmy: Well, Bruce and I were staying at the same hotel during the making of Darkness, and uh, one night - I was working with Patti at night and Bruce during the day because Bruce's album took a little longer than expected - and I played Bruce what I had done with Patti up to date, and I had felt that there wasn't a single yet, meaning a '45, and uh, I asked Bruce if he had any song that he thought would fit on Patti's record, and he mentioned Because The Night. I, I had also felt the same way, so he picked up his acoustic guitar and he played it. He raised the key 'cause he figured Patti would never do it in the higher key, and it sounded real good, and he said, 'Why don't you send her a tape and see what you think?' And that's what I did and she liked it and he came out to the studio one day and we cut it.

Carol: Oh, it sounds great (laughs).

Jimmy: Well, it is great.

Carol: (laughs)

Q#3 - Carol: Let me ask you one last question, uh, there's a lot of bootlegging going on as far as Bruce Springsteen, a lawsuit too, these are tapes evidently of concerts you recorded with Bruce, how do you feel about this bootlegging stuff?

Jimmy: Well, I think what the kids are getting, the kids are being robbed because they're getting 5th or 6th generation tapes and also, material that's not ...wasn't, that wasn't okayed by Bruce. I think that if they, the kids should wait and Bruce will put out a live record, which will be representing what HE, representative of what he wants out as a record, uh, it's very bad quality, and I don't think it's fair.

Carol: Okay, well thanks a lot Jimmy.

Jimmy: Thanks a lot, Carol.

Closing - Carol: Well, I guess you know, you're Bruce fans right, you know there's a lot, uh, tapes around, like, you say, well, why can't we play a bootleg here or why aren't we gonna play you a tape? Well, the answer is 'cause it isn't right. You know, it's not fair to Bruce, and so, that's why, uh, we don't play it here at WPLJ but the records are great, you know, and I really, I'll tell you I a boss, you know, and he won't let me do anymore Bruce Springsteen night. He's a great guy but I understand there are other rock artists in the world, like The Who and The Beatles, you know, so we gotta back to them in just a second. I really hope you enjoy it here at WPLJ, uh Bruce Springsteen night. PLJ weather for the city, clear and less humid tonight, low in the upper...
