---
title: "Darkness Review"
author: "Peter Watts"
source: "1001 Albums You Must Hear Before You Die"
date: "2006-02-07"
category: "Album Review"
---

Thanks to a legal dispute with former manager Mike Appel, Springsteen had three years to bask in the stellar success of Born To Run, and to comtemplate its follow-up. The resulting album, Darkness On The Edge Of Town, is a very different beast from its predecessor.

Like Dylan before him, Springsteen withdrew from fame, moving to a farm in New Jersey so he could refocus on "life in the close confines of the small towns I grew up in." He wanted to "write about the stress and tension of my father's and mother's life that came with the difficulties of trying to make ends meet." (The album was originally to be called "American Madness", after a Frank Capra movie about the Depression.) Fatherhood is one of the album's themes ("Adam Raised A Cain"); struggle another ("Streets Of Fire", "Factory"). These are songs about small-town frustration, sometimes sexual ("Candy's Room"), sometimes social ("The Promised Land").

Being Bruce, the angst is tempered with romance, particularly for the road -- many songs involve driving, either for escape, for thrills, or both -- but musically, this is a much more subdued affair than Born To Run. Clarence Clemons' sax is rarely heard. Instead, Springsteen's guitar and Roy Bittan's measured, melancholic piano set the tone.

Uplifting, downbeat, bleak, and mad as hell, Darkness... is a spellbinding B-movie epic to follow the blockbuster of Born To Run.
