---
title: "Trump strikes a chord with Springsteen's America"
author: "Ben Macintyre"
source: "The London Times"
date: "2016-10-07"
category: "Commentary"
---

The Boss may loathe The Donald but blue-collar Americans who inspire his music are siding with the Republican tycoon

Bruce Springsteen once remarked: "I spent most of my life as a musician measuring the distance between the American dream and the American reality."

That disillusioned space, the expanse between hope and truth, is where some of the key battles of the presidential election are being fought. The American white working class that Springsteen sings about is suffering badly, battered by unemployment, drugs and economic decay. Of the two candidates, Donald Trump has appealed far more successfully to the fears, resentments and patriotism of this key demographic.

The Boss has strong opinions about The Donald. "The republic is under siege by a moron", he told Rolling Stone magazine, adding that Trump offers "simple answers to very complex questions". Hillary Clinton, he says, would make "a very, very good president".

Springsteen is the great bard of the American Rustbelt. In his music and newly published autobiography he explores the plight of the working man, the forgotten veterans, the failed relationships, and the sadness and hardiness of deindustrialised America. The book, Born to Run, charts the "joy and heartbreak of everyday life" Springsteen felt growing up in dead-end Freehold, New Jersey, and what it was like to live through "the Fifties blue-collar world and the Sixties social experience". Above it all looms the troubled relationship with his father, an ill-tempered high school dropout who drifted from one bar and one low-grade job to another, sometimes a bus driver and sometimes a pool shark, but never really there.

As a result, Springsteen's song-writing is full of the longing for escape, the frustrated American dream ("Seems like you can't get any more than half-free", he sings in Straight Times), the urge for the open road and a fast car in a gritty landscape with "the skeleton frames of burned-out Chevrolets" in Thunder Road. In Adam Raised a Cain he recalls his father: "Daddy worked his whole life for nothing but the pain/ now he walks these empty rooms, looking for something to blame".

But there is also a dogged faith in America, despite all the disappointments, that runs through Springsteen's music. "Lately there ain't been much work", he sings in The River, a ballad of unwanted pregnancy, shotgun marriage, unemployment, poverty and hope. The old river still carries the hope of renewal that "sends me down to the river/ Though I know the river is dry." In his greatest anthem, Born to Run, he evokes a better, mythical America that is always just over the horizon: "We're gonna get to that place/ Where we really want to go ...tramps like us, baby we were born to run."

This is the political landscape Trump has colonised. A recent analysis in The New York Times found that many of the towns and cities in Springsteen songs were either Trump strongholds or places where the Republican candidate is making significant inroads. In the depressed blue-collar communities of western Pennsylvania evoked by The River, for example, Trump has a 20 per cent lead over Clinton among white voters without a college degree.

These working-class, middle-aged Americans feel they have been left behind by modern culture and a modern economy, and are looked down on by the metropolitan elite on both coasts. Eight years under President Obama have deepened that anger: an economy that failed to produce enough fresh jobs, the legacy of two botched wars fought for causes that few could understand, and Wall Street banks bailed out while ordinary Americans lost their homes. Trump has skilfully channelled their apprehension about low-wage immigration and free trade into solid support for the Republican ticket. He has done this, in part, by "looking for something to blame", namely Mexicans and Muslims.

When Trump promises to Make America Great Again he is appealing to the citizens who recognise themselves in Springsteen's lyrics, the same people who, however downtrodden, still believe they can reach a mythical, better country.

"A price is being paid for not addressing the real cost of the deindustrialisation and globalisation that has occurred in the US ...and how it's deeply affected people's lives and deeply hurt people." The words are Springsteen's but they could just as easily have been Trump's, a multibillionaire real estate magnate with no real empathy for the struggling classes.

Springsteen campaigned for John Kerry, the Democratic presidential hopeful, in 2004 and performed alongside Bill Clinton at a rally for Barack Obama in 2008.

His political allegiances are clear but it is equally certain that Hillary Clinton and the Democratic Party have failed to strike a chord with many of the Rustbelt voters who should be flocking to her standard.

In Youngstown, Springsteen sang of the Ohio steel town, fallen on hard times.

"Seven hundred tons of metal a day/ now sir you tell me the world's changed."

Northeast Ohio was once a Democratic stronghold but support for Clinton among working-class voters has steadily eroded, to the point where this battleground state is now regarded as a likely win for Trump.

The distance between the American dream and American reality continues to grow, and Bruce Springsteen continues to measure it with inspired music. But Hillary Clinton has not been listening properly, and Donald Trump has

s
