---
title: "Springsteen Cooks With Rock 'n' Roll"
author: "George Kanzler Jr."
source: "The Star-Ledger"
date: "1974-10-23"
category: "Commentary"
---

Note: Photo attached in article [here](https://www.njarts.net/pop-rock/springsteens-1974s-capitol-theatre-debut-read-the-original-star-ledger-review/). Transcribed as best as I can below.

New Jersey's own rock 'n' roll star, Bruce Springsteen, topped the bill at the Capitol Theater in Passaic in more than convincing fashion.

Before the appearance of Bruce and his band it was a long and desultory evening, dominated by pedestrian rock by Dan Fogelberg, whose approach could best be described as mainstream metal, and John Sebastian, who abandoned his strong suit, gentle flower rock, to concentrate largely on the same electric metal sound. It was all energetic, undistinguished and mostly uninspired.

With opening acts like that. Springsteen, the local hope, couldn't miss. In fact he hasn't missed lately at all, as far as most rock critics and his growing legion of fans are concerned; (One important critic has said: "I have seen the rock 'n' roll future, and it's name is Bruce Springsteen.")

Springsteen is already a cult in Jersey, with a growing, almost fanatic following, and his cult, in a weird triumph for the Garden State, is growing rapidly among rock cognoscenti.

When Bruce's first album "Greetings From Asbury Park, N.J." (Columbia) appeared in Igor Records in Freehold, Springsteen's home turf, Igor celebrated by devoting an entire wall of the store to the album. But even Igor admitted that something was missing from that record.

The album was a harsh blend of middle-period Dylan (whirling dervish lyrics with cascading lines of incessant rhymes), and choruses and music harkening back to the heydey of producers like Phil Spector and Leiber & Stoller. It was all a little too frantic and rushed and didn't impress.

---

Soon thereafter I saw Springsteen at Max's [Kansas City] in New York and was more put off by his strained grimacing, an uncomfortable reminder of Joe Cocker's spastic performances.

A second album, "The Wild, the Innocent & the E Street Shuffle." was more impressive but also suffered from a certain tentativeness and a mix that obscured the lyrics, (No lyric sheet with this one.) The music was powerful, more varied than on "Asbury Park", and closer to the prole soul of rock 'rock' roll that informs Springsteen's vision.

---

But nothing I'd heard before prepared me for, or even suggested, the awesome brilliance of Springsteen's act at the Capitol last week. Most of the songs are on the albums; the band, although not exactly the same, is similar. Bruce still plays basic, raunchy rock guitar, unspectacularly. He still has a very limited voice--in terms of musical range. But now he's not just Bruce Springsteen, songwriter-singer, he's Bruce Springsteen rock 'n' roll star, completely conscious of that image, manipulative of it, and utterly convincing.

Musically, Springsteen knows how to build a song to a rousing chorus and climax, something I suspect he's learned from listening to Phil Spector. He used his band -- organ, piano, bass, drums, sax and his own guitar -- with an excellent sense of dynamics and tension, music better than on the records.

But then everything was much better than the records. Springsteen's voice, familiar with and confident about the material, is more dramatic and suggestive than anyone singing rock today, shifting from the insinuations of a Lou Reed to the paeans of a Van Morrison to the ironies of a Loudon Wainwright -- shifting smoother and in more extended a range than they ever could.

Even more important, and the supreme enhancement, is the stage presence, the dramatic act, the theatrical image, the charisma that is Bruce Springsteen on stage. With his arrogant shades, macho stance -- Elvis without the grind -- and dramatic interaction with the microphone (Did he learn it from Tina Turner?). Bruce Springsteen is one of the very few rock performers I've ever seen so totally in control of his onstage image. Like Mick Jagger, he knows exactly what he's doing, but Bruce lacks the show biz mince. The Angels frightened Mick, Bruce comes on like a messenger of the Angels.

Springsteen may not quite be the rock 'n' roll future, but he is a crystallization of the rock 'n' roll past, a complete performer who has mixed Dylan, punk rock, Spector, and a love of the underdog into an irresistible stage mix.
