---
title: "Bruce hits all the right notes"
author: "Don Ermen"
source: "Ottawa Sun"
date: "2012-11-09"
category: "Book Review"
---

Bruce is the new biography of Bruce Springsteen by Peter Ames Carlin.

For devoted Bruce Springsteen fans, there's probably not much you don't know about the man.

Thanks to the wealth of information you can find on the Internet, the same could be said of many our top artists in today's pop culture. But unlike factoids, rumours and journalism of varying quality, Bruce, the new biography by Peter Ames Carlin, attempts to explain what drives the man behind the legions of fans, hit songs and blue-collar hero persona.

His relationship with his father is well known. It's hard not to know that songs like Adam Raised a Cain, Factory and Independence Day all deal with Springsteen's relationship with his father, Doug Springsteen. Even casual fans know that songs like Dancing in the Dark, while musically upbeat and one of his greatest hits, is lyrically dark and depressing.

```
I get up in the evening and I ain't got nothing to say
I come home in the morning, I go to bed feeling the same way
I ain't nothing but tired, man I'm just tired and bored with myself
Hey there baby, I could use just a little help
```

Yet the energy of his performance is such that every time Springsteen sings Dancing in the Dark, usually in the encore, every fan jumps to his feet.

But the new bio still manages to surprise with a few gems here and there, thanks most likely to Springsteen's participation. Although it's not an official biography, Springsteen agreed to be interviewed for the book, along with members of the E Street Band, former managers, friends, family members, and ex-girlfriends.

Probably the most interesting material is the early childhood history. It really gives you an insight into what shaped Springsteen. Carlin's storytelling approach is engaging. In fact, the best parts of the book are the passages when he moved away from breaking down songs and quoting lyrics.

The disappointment is that there isn't more of Springsteen's voice. Yes, it was a coup to even get the Boss to participate. But there are just as many quotes from other sources. In fairness, though, these sources are legitimate and credited properly. This is not an "unknown source said" kind of bio.

The book brags that this is the first time band members have spoken openly about the breakup of the E Street Band after the 1989 tour. Well, if the book is a true reflection of how they all feel, I'm not quite sure what the big deal was. It seems like it was a bigger deal to the fans.

Bassist Garry Tallent wasn't surprised. Drummer Max Weinberg was hurt but not surprised. Guitarist Nils Lofgren, who had only joined the band for the Born in the USA tour, was just happy to have spent any time with Springsteen. Steven Van Zandt had already left and pianist Roy Bittan stayed on in Bruce's new band. The only person who really talked about how crushed he'd been was Clarence Clemons, the beloved saxophonist who died of stroke complications in 2011.

Where the book succeeds is detailing Springsteen's attention to detail, his quest for that perfect sound, the perfect lyrics. At times you wonder if it was insecurity that drove Springsteen to rewrite songs, change lyrics or spend up two years to deliver an album. Or was his commitment a sign of genius, the path of a street poet who wanted to be taken seriously, who believes rock music can make a difference, even if at times it only lifts people up for the duration of a concert.

Springsteen concerts are legendary because of his energy and endurance. He's a crowd pleaser, who even at the age of 63 will venture into the audience several times during the night, dance with a fan, get a little kid to sing on stage and crowd surf. Amongst all the energy and showmanship, sometimes we forget what makes Springsteen great is his songs. And if there was ever any belief that he just tossed them off, cruising the edges of a pop path, this book puts that firmly to rest.

A lot of Bruce covers Springsteen's early days and as Carlin explores his songs, you realize Springsteen is more than a working class hero. Springsteen's connection to his blue-collar roots is strong, but without his artistry and sincere concern about oppression and injustice his message wouldn't translate so effectively.

There are artists out there who think they put themselves under the harsh spotlight, artists who think they are baring their souls. But no one does it quite like Springsteen. His unvarnished emotions, convictions and sincerity, woven into powerful songs, connect listeners to the anguish of our times.

Whether it's the anger over Wall Street robber barons, love for a woman, conflict over a marriage or the struggle to understand his father, there are very few artists who dig as deep as Springsteen.

This biography puts into words the feelings fans have for Springsteen and his music, providing insight into the reasons he's left — and continues to leave — an indelible mark on music and pop culture.

The determination, the isolation, the single-mindedness of Springsteen is on display. And just like his concerts, it's an experience.
