---
title: "Springsteen rocks into Perth"
author: "Staff Reporters"
source: "The West Australian"
date: "2014-02-04"
category: "News"
---

Bruce Springsteen has rocked into Perth ahead of his three sold-out shows.

The Boss was greeted by fans at Perth Airport this afternoon.

Asked about his first impressions of Perth, Springsteen replied: "It's hot."

"I'm not sure what I'm going to do yet", he said of his visit.

These are Springsteen's first gigs in WA in a career stretching five decades.

The 65-year-old added a third Perth show after the first two concerts sold out in a matter of minutes in September.

Promoter Michael Gudinski said the Born to Run rocker was "knocked out" by the demand for tickets in Perth and agreed to fly into town a few days earlier to accommodate the extra gig.

He kicked off the tour with his first-ever show in South Africa in Cape Town on January 28.

Fans lucky enough to score tickets to the Perth Arena shows won't have to ruin their concert experience by trying to record it on their mobile phones.

Springsteen is giving fans the chance to enjoy his shows at home by selling instant downloads of his gigs.

Fans can buy USB wristbands on the internet or at one of his concerts. These allow them to download a concert of their choice hours after the event and watch it online.

Springsteen released his 18th studio album, High Hopes, on January 17 ahead of his world tour.

High Hopes mixes unreleased originals and covers from the past decade with live fan favourites from the 2013's Wrecking Ball tour.

Bruce Springsteen and the E Street band play Perth Arena on February 5, 7 and 8.
