---
title: "Cold Case, Hot Tunes: Springsteen's Soundtrack"
author: "Jonah Weiner"
source: "The New York Times"
date: "2006-01-07"
category: "News"
---

Tomorrow night, the CBS crime drama "Cold Case" will feature the work of an unlikely guest writer. He has won 12 Grammy Awards, has sold tens of millions of albums, and has never worked behind the scenes in television. What's more, he did not type out a single word for the show's script. Instead, he sang it all.

That writer is Bruce Springsteen, from whom "Cold Case" licensed nine songs, building a murder mystery around his lyrics. The episode, titled "8 Years"follows four high school friends from 1980 through 1988, when one of them is found dead.

"Cold Case", a series that constructs every episode around the excavation and resolution of an old unsolved crime, often uses music to suggest time and place - Benny Goodman for the late 40's, for instance, or Cyndi Lauper for the mid-80's.

But instead of turning Mr. Springsteen's songs, all originally released from 1980 to 1987, into mere backdrops, Meredith Stiehm, the show's creator and the writer of this episode, used them to construct and advance the story.

Graduation day is narrated by the exultant "No Surrender", while the climactic murder scene is set to the poignant "Atlantic City."

"The idea originally was to use no dialogue at all", Ms. Stiehm said. "His songs are that rich, so full of characters and vignettes." Suffice it to say, cars, highways and the Jersey Shore figure heavily into the plot.

Although Mr. Springsteen won an Academy Award for his contribution to the soundtrack of the 1993 film "Philadelphia", he rarely lends his music to television. "Cold Case" is an exception. The series, now in its third season, had used two Springsteen songs in earlier seasons: "Walk Like a Man" in its first and "Secret Garden" in its second.

Wende Crowley, the show's music supervisor, said the courtship for the episode being shown tomorrow night was surprisingly smooth. "His management was very interested from the start", she said. "Once we had a script, we sent it over, and they said yes."

Ms. Stiehm added, with a laugh, "We have a theory that his wife is a huge fan." It certainly did not hurt that the episode's director, Mark Pellington, also directed the video for Mr. Springsteen's 2002 single "Lonesome Day." Ms.

Stiehm said that relationship created "a comfort zone."

A representative of Mr. Springsteen said he was unavailable for comment. With the notable exception of "Miami Vice", which made iconic use of Phil Collins's "In the Air Tonight" in 1984, television shows until recently relied on anonymous session men for their incidental music. (Gathered under the heading "library music", many of these performances have become cult collector's items.)

Today, though, producers are using pop music instead. Prime time has suddenly become a place to hear familiar songs from favorite groups, and to discover songs by unfamiliar ones.

"It's become part of what audiences want to see and hear when they turn on the **TV:** real songs by real bands", said Alexandra Patsavas, the music supervisor for the teenage soap "The O.C.", the crime show "Without a Trace" and the hospital drama "Grey's Anatomy." "Licensing songs", she added, "is a an expense producers are considering more and more crucial." The cost of licensing a song can vary widely, from about $500 to $30,000, depending on the artist and the rights requested.

No show has done more to champion the new and unfamiliar than "The O.C." Ms.

Patsavas and Josh Schwartz, the show's 29-year-old creator, have introduced a fleet of alternative and indie-rock bands to mainstream audiences. Mr.

Schwartz's musical tastes, worthy of a Pitchfork editor, are represented in the show's score and by the character Seth Cohen, the show's resident hipster dweeb. Cohen, played by Adam Brody, has become an unlikely tastemaker, expounding on screen on the virtues of Rooney, Bright Eyes and Death Cab for Cutie, the Seattle foursome signed by Atlantic Records after its "O.C." exposure.

Indie-rock bands, which typically enjoy no significant radio play, have a lot to gain from hit television shows, where the audience for a single episode can dwarf the number of people who bought, for instance, 50 Cent's last album. "If it weren't for TV, indie bands would never reach audiences this big", said Jen Czeisler, vice president of licensing for the independent label Sub Pop. "Our bands don't get on commercial radio and they don't get on MTV, so these shows are a huge opportunity for them."

Ms. Czeisler noted that after a song by the synth-pop duo the Postal Service was used in trailers for "Grey's Anatomy", the duo's debut album experienced a notable rise in sales. "They were supposed to be flattening", she said, "but they just kept going up and up."

Along with "The O.C.", shows like "One Tree Hill", a WB teenage drama, and "Six Feet Under", HBO's cult hit, have given healthy boosts to little rockers that could. Another HBO show, "Entourage", regularly features hip-hop songs and has turned the up-and-coming rapper Saigon into a recurring character.

Shows with largely older (and largely less hip) audiences have also incorporated the music of younger acts. In a 2003 episode, "Without a Trace" featured a song by the White Stripes; the British group Clinic and Sub Pop's Iron and Wine have also licensed songs to police shows.

Even bands that enjoy major-label backing and significant sales - among them Coldplay, Oasis and even the Who (who provide the theme songs for all three "CSI" shows) - can benefit from having one of their songs on a hit show. "Big, established bands that are interested in reaching younger and broader audiences often license their songs for less money", Ms. Patsavas said, adding, "Sometimes it's just because the artists love the show." Last year, an episode of "The O.C." was written around six songs from Beck's recent album, "Guero." Beck, Ms. Patsavas said, is an "O.C." fan.

The Houston rapper Lil' Flip was written into the plot of a recent episode of NBC's "Las Vegas", and the Killers and Modest Mouse, major-label rock bands with indie sensibilities, have both performed on "The O.C.", at the fictional nightclub the Bait Shop. As proved by "American Idol", MTV's "Newlyweds: Nick and Jessica" and iPod commercials that have helped propel record sales for U2 and Gorillaz, musicians both new and established stand to sell a lot of their albums given the right television exposure.

"Bands can't just rely on the old ways anymore", said Scott Carter, vice president of marketing at Epic Records and Modest Mouse's product manager.

"These days, you have to have a lot more going on besides radio and video if you want to sell a bunch of records."

Ms. Crowley of "Cold Case" said: "There was this stigma attached to television, but now it's livening up. Whenever I approach a band for licensing, I tell them: TV is the new radio."
