---
title: "Springsteen shows who's The Boss"
author: "Tom Harrison"
source: "Vancouver Province"
date: "2005-08-13"
category: "Concert Review"
---

SOLO SET: Tardiness for last show of tour only builds crowd anticipation

He's just banging his guitar with his hand but it sounds like a heartbeat.

He's singing off the microphone about the dream of life, but it's the message that rings loud and clear throughout his show.

Bruce Springsteen was at GM Place last night for the last show of his summer tour to promote Devils & Dust, his latest album. It was called the Pontiac Theatre, which is another term for having a hockey rink. So 7,000 people witnessed a two-hour, 20-minute solo performance.

True to the warning of the ads and on the tickets, latecomers were not seated once the show began.

This was a formality as fans of Bruce Springsteen are dedicated and therefore were seated.

But the solemnity of this highlighted the fact that he has only toured solo twice in a career of more than 30 years.

He nonetheless was late by about 45 minutes, which gave some time to scan the stage. which was a backdrop of drapery and an assortment of guitars and keyboards.

It was a deceptively simple set-up, designed to put all the attention on him, as the nature of the show was described as intimate. It's hard to be intimate in a hockey rink, but the strategy worked. His lateness was also a chance to hear a few Springsteen testimonials. His songs changed lives. They touch people on a personal level, so there was anticipation building when he finally did show.

He started with the unexpected. A performance of "Living Proof" at a pump organ.

He continued with the unorthodox by performing "Reason to Believe" as a Sonny Boy Williamson blues.

There were unexpected songs, too, such as "Because the Night", "Blinded by the Light", and "Sandy", songs he rarely, if ever, performs anymore.

A lot of the songs were about characters who felt alone and struggled. They were underlined by Springsteen's adaptation of a lonesome, keening wail, first heard effectively during the "The River."

His characters are solitary. Fighting the odds. Driving them is the heartbeat, the dream of life.
