---
title: "Bruce Springsteen proves he's The Boss of our town in his Sydney show at Allphones Arena"
author: "Kathy McCabe"
source: "The Daily Telegraph"
date: "2014-02-19"
category: "Concert Review"
---

STANDING in the pit at a Bruce Springsteen concert will spoil you for life.

After experiencing five of his concerts in the past year from various vantage points - and loving every minute of it - good fortune put me on the floor at the front for the only Sydney concert on this victory lap of Australia.

There, the crowd is full of friendly disciples of this rock god and the mighty E Street Band, people who have dedicated their lives, and probably tens of thousands of dollars, to worship at their rock'n'roll church.

It is a happy, sweaty place full of smiling, singing, dancing, sign-waving acolytes.

Bruce Springsteen is a performer without equal.

Above them and sometimes among them, is a performer who has become the benchmark for anyone who believes music can make a difference.

Springsteen's songs have always wielded power to provoke thought and feeling.

Yet it is in the live arena where they transcend their execution in the studio to become a celebration of the magic of music.

Springsteen is an artist of surprises and even though the most ardent followers expect them, you had to be blindsided by the incendiary kick off of the Allphones Arena concert with The Easybeats' Friday On My Mind.

The Boss ripped it up, clearly thrilled to be adopting this Australian anthem into the seemingly inexhaustible repertoire of the E Street Band

As they have done at every show with their tribute to The Saints with Just Like Fire Would and later last night with the wholly unexpected rendition of INXS's Don't Change.

Springsteen is always astutely attuned to his environment and would of course be aware of the band's current rejuvenation.

As many of his diehard fans had predicted, The Boss continued with his now Australian tradition of revisiting an album in full.

Melbourne got Born In The USA and Born To Run, Sydney got Darkness On The Edge Of Town.

It is rare, actually never until tonight, that playing an entire album in the middle of a concert is a monumental occasion. At this time, in the life of this band, it is something you will never forget.

Then so many, many songs to keep you anchored in the joyous and at times deeply emotional abandon of a concert you know will always stay with you.

Waiting On A Sunny Day, Shackled And Drawn, The Ghost Of Tom Joad, Darlington County, Dancing In The Dark, Born To Run, Land Of Hope and Dreams and a version of Dream Baby Dream which brought tears.

Through it all, you believed every one of his beaming grins, every intense frown as he ripped out the solos, every entreaty to rise to the occasion, the chug of beer, the crowd surf and all that booty shaking. That man knows how to shake his ass.

And to see it and hear it and feel it from just a few metres away, is to know why music matters.

Yep, it really was that good.

Bruce Springsteen performs at the Hope Estate, Hunter Valley on Saturday and Sunday and Brisbane Entertainment Centre on Wednesday.
