---
title: "The Boss and Me"
author: "Sarfraz Manzoor"
source: "The Guardian"
date: "2002-08-07"
category: "Interview"
---

'What are you doing in Pittsburgh?" It was a perfectly fair question to ask and Bruce Springsteen had as much right to ask me as anyone. It was April 26 2000 and I was in the city to review a concert by Bruce Springsteen and the E Street Band for a music magazine. But, if truth be told, I had only ever got into journalism for opportunities such as these.

In the 12 years since I first saw him live, I have been to around 30 Springsteen concerts and have met him a few times outside hotels and stage doors, where he has scribbled his name across an album cover or posed for a photograph. While working for Channel 4 News, I spent a week sitting near him in the high court during a case he was pursuing against a record label.

I didn't think that these fleeting meetings had made much impact on him but there I was, in the cavernous Mellon Arena, cheering with the thousands, when, during Out in the Street, he ambled towards the side of the stage to get closer to the whooping crowd. He was only yards away when he spotted me and smiled broadly. It must have seemed strange to see a vaguely familiar face in the middle of an anonymous Pittsburgh crowd and his question was a reasonable one. To be a passionate fan at 16 is natural - and normal - but to remain one in your 30s is to invite derision and suspicion. I did not think of myself as socially inadequate; nor did I still live with my mother. So what was I doing in Pittsburgh?

I was not always a Bruce Springsteen fan. For the first 16 years of my life, I was only dimly aware of his existence. Mine was a working-class Pakistani family and so the music I heard as a young boy in Luton consisted mostly of songs from Indian films; the only time western pop music smuggled itself into my consciousness was through the television. That all changed when I was 12 and I bought my first radio. Since we didn't have a record player, it became my sole window on to pop culture. That might help explain why when others went through the 80s listening to The Smiths, Husker Du or The Pixies, I spent my teenage years in the company of Duran Duran, A-ha and Lionel Ritchie. It was only later that I appreciated how tragic that was; at the time I was not looking for profound truths or insightful lyrics, and so didn't care if the music was not nutritious or inspiring. It didn't have to be; after all, it was only music.

When I first met Amolak we were both 16 and had just started sixth-form college in Luton. Like me, he was from a working-class Asian family and, like me, he liked his music. The first time I saw him he had a pair of headphones wrapped over his turban. I asked him what he was listening to and he replied that it was Bruce Springsteen. I laughed. Bruce Springsteen? The millionaire who made his millions from singing about the working class? Why on earth was a Sikh boy from Luton so keen on this white American who looked like a mechanic, and who made music for white Americans who looked like mechanics?

Amolak was so enthusiastic about Springsteen that I agreed to listen to a cassette of songs that he had made. That evening, I waited for my parents to go to bed and for the house to fall silent. I turned off the lights in my bedroom, popped the cassette into my personal stereo, hit the play button and closed my eyes. It was like nothing I had ever heard before. Here was someone singing not about dancing on the ceiling or total eclipses of the heart, but about real lives that I could identify with: about wanting to leave a town of losers; about working in factories and not getting on with your father. Listening to Springsteen made me realise that everything with which I had been feeding my ears until then was nothing more than the plastic posing of irrelevant fools. The next day I went to college and asked Amolak if he had any more cassettes.

During the next few months I got hold of everything Springsteen had ever recorded. I would come home from college and go straight to my room and play Born to Run four, sometimes five, times straight. It wasn't as if I had anything else to do. Being a working-class Pakistani teenager in Luton in the 80s was to live a life of itchy claustrophobia. I had drifted through adolescence experiencing few of the things that defined such times: no childhood holidays, no playing football with my dad, no family gatherings at Christmas; no sense that there was anything beyond our three-bedroom semi. I knew that there had to be some way out, but until I heard Springsteen, I did not know how.

He may have sung about American characters seeking their share of the American dream, but something in his music touched a chord. I heard a man - also from a working-class background - singing about people who were also living lives of quiet desperation but who had not given up hope. Born to Run, Darkness on the Edge of Town, The River: these albums were more than just collections of songs; they were windows into an infinitely more compelling world than anything I had experienced. Springsteen sang about highways jammed with broken heroes on a last-chance power ride; all I knew was going to the Arndale Centre at weekends. It was the sound of another world, the hint of another life: the promise of freedom.

But it wasn't just romantic escapism. On a bootleg concert tape, I heard Springsteen say that, "It was easy to let the best of yourself slip away". I translated this to mean that I could not accept a life like so many of those with whom I had gone to school: a life of soul-crushing work and early families. The moral of Springsteen's music was not to become a character in a Springsteen song. More than anything else, it was Bruce who gave me the motivation to leave Luton, and provided the map of how to escape.

Fast-forward a decade and a half and the 16-year-boy did get out of Luton; I now have a career and lifestyle that my teenage self would have thought unattainable. During those years, Springsteen provided the looping soundtrack to my changing life. On June 25 1988, Amolak and I went to see him at Wembley stadium. That night I got to see him in the flesh for the first time, singing the songs that I had been living with for the past nine months. At 19, I went to the United States for the first time; my vision of America as a troubled promised land had largely been formed by his music and in our week there, Amolak and I made a pilgrimage to Asbury Park in New Jersey where Springsteen had started out.

Two years later, I missed my graduation to see him at Wembley Arena after having queued for two days straight to get front-row tickets. Graduation day was no great loss; after all - as all Bruce fans know - you learn more from a three-minute record than you ever did at school. Just before the concert, as Amolak parked the car, I waited outside the back entrance to the Arena. A people-carrier rolled in, and a familiar face stepped out and walked slowly towards the small crowd awaiting him. Minutes later, I was face to face with Springsteen. There was no time for conversation; I simply handed him my copy of Born to Run, which he duly signed. By the time Amolak returned from parking the car, Bruce had disappeared and I had an autographed album and a very pissed-off friend.

Over the years, I would meet Springsteen again and have the chance to have proper conversations with him. Even though he has had a colossal impact on my life, it was strangely undaunting to talk to him; he never cultivated an aloofness like other stars; and besides, it was never about him, it was about the music.

When Springsteen returned to play acoustic shows in early 1996, it was only months after my father's death and I was out of work: the concerts offered blessed relief during my darkest days. That autumn I started work and with a decent job came the money and the opportunity to travel to see Springsteen across the country and all over the world from Birmingham to Barcelona, Paris to Pittsburgh.

And so to today and a brand new Springsteen album - The Rising - and a new world tour which starts tonight in New Jersey. I'll be there, as a fan, for that show as well as his gigs in Washington and New York. You might be wondering why anyone would want to see one singer so many times, but Springsteen concerts are like nothing else in rock music. His fans have been described as belonging to an invisible church and it is at his concerts that the faithful gather, seeking salvation and redemption. It's probably no coincidence that I fell into Springsteen's music around the same time that I started losing my religion.

It isn't cool to have heroes, and if you are going to have one, Springsteen is perhaps not an obvious choice for someone like myself. But to me, Bruce is the last, if not the only, great American hero. He has never let his fans down and his music has always been rooted in integrity and honesty. At 52, he is still making great music, surrounded by a band of brothers he has known for 30 years. He is the living embodiment of the ideals of his work - a working-class guy who made something of his life and won big, but who still carries the broken spirits of all the other ones who lost. That is why I am proud to call myself a Springsteen fan, and why I will be at the Continental Arena in New Jersey tonight, along with 20,000 others, to cheer the local hero back on stage. He probably won't speak to me as he did in Pittsburgh, but it won't matter: his music has been talking to me for years.
