---
title: "Trouble In Australia: Rising from the ruins"
author: "Sean Sennett"
source: "The Sydney Morning Herald"
date: "2002-09-09"
category: "Interview"
---

The Rising ...Springsteen channels the zeitgeist.

Bruce Springsteen, shattered by the September 11 terrorist attacks, has dug deep to express his pain, Sean Sennett reports.

Backstage at Washington State's Tacoma Dome, Bruce Springsteen strums a few chords and flips through a green notebook littered with notes and lyrics. It's two hours until show time, and he is in the middle of a 46-date US tour with a reconstituted E-Street Band.

Today, the sight of Springsteen performing in America is like attending a revivalist rally. His US No1 album The Rising sees him largely reflecting on the events and aftermath of September 11.

A full month after the World Trade Center towers were brought down, funerals were being held on a daily basis at the church close to Springsteen's New Jersey home. His natural instinct was to pick up a guitar. "I wasn't sitting there putting pieces together from a puzzle", he says. "I was writing from the inside."

Deeply affected by the tragedy, Springsteen has never shied away from documenting the times in which we live. First came the songs Into The Fire and You're Missing: songs that celebrate the life of ordinary people and the inexplicable loss generated by extraordinary events.

Springsteen began by telling the stories of people from his extended community, many of whom, as part of his audience, he had shared a certain communion with over the past 30 years. Obituaries appeared in local newspapers where widows recounted the impact Springsteen had had on lost loved ones. In some cases, Springsteen picked up the phone to offer support as well as writing songs to celebrate their life.

"The starting-off place was to probably write as emotionally as I could about the feelings that were going on in my community and the country at large at the time", he says quietly. "I just took it song by song. The natural context I was writing in led me down certain paths. I had a 30-year history of talking to an audience in maybe a particular way that I think may have suited itself to this particular moment in time.

"[With] Into The Fire and then You're Missing, I felt I had something going. These were the concerns I was going to be addressing in some fashion, the ideas of loss and a certain shattered spirituality. How do those things get put back together? What do those people leave behind? What's their contribution to the living, beyond their valour and duty served? What are the living left with?

"With The Rising and My City Of Ruins, what do the ruins leave you with? Where's the seed of the next day? Where's the seed of the next life? And how does that continue on from the feelings of loss to getting people moving again and feeling alive? Those issues were the central questions to the record."

Springsteen heeded the call of his audience. Like most of the world, he watched the terrorist attacks on television. A couple of days later he drove to a New Jersey bridge to look across the water at where the towers once had been. A week later Springsteen was climbing into his car when a stranger driving by rolled down the window and yelled "We need you!".

Previous Springsteen records have intimated the ticking of the human clock. On The Rising, the artist draws us into a world where there's a stillness in the imagery. It's an unconscious technique that adds to the emotional clout of the song.

"I hadn't thought about it until you mentioned it, but I think that was part of its emotional drift and purpose when I was writing it. I was probably trying to get myself to do the same thing", Springsteen says.

"[The songs] express a moment of tremendous disorientation. If you've experienced those kind of moments, you can feel suspended within them until you can get your feet back down and start moving again. It's a moment where things feel as if they've just stopped. Reflection, some spiritual searching and certainly, if not answers, reasons, are called for to help you get moving forward again.

"The work that the record does is to try and pull you ultimately out of that moment and get your feet back on the ground and get you moving."

The writing on the album has Springsteen using "broad strokes". He has described the songs as having "the blues in the verses" and "the gospel in the chorus". It's a potent mix. On stage Springsteen seizes the moment and, at times, lapses into a fire and brimstone character that promises righteous music from the E-Street Band engine room.

"I'm sticking more to a basic pop form", he admits. "There's hooks and choruses and things you just sing along with, because I needed to get people engaged.

"The idea of getting your feet back on the ground means you have to engage someone in a variety of different ways. I was interested in engaging the audience actively. It wasn't just a listening experience this time out. It was standing up and clapping, throwing your arms around the person next to you.

"It was that transcendent emotional ecstasy we try to pull out of the audience at night. I see that on people's faces. We're going after that effect, we were trying to rawly excite people, just to get their adrenaline up and pumping and get them to feel themselves emotionally and physically."

Of course The Rising, which was recorded in Atlanta, Georgia, with producer Brendan O'Brien, can be enjoyed on a level other than a direct interpretation of feelings and events post September 11.

"I think I was interested in those general ideas as they tangentially applied to not what happened here in the States, but just generally", Springsteen says. "You could take The Rising or Into The Fire and put them on Darkness On The Edge Of Town [1978]. You could take Promised Land off Darkness and put it on this record.

"For the song to work and have its own inner integrity, I think you have to write independently of events. I think you need to be able to play the record for somebody who has no idea what the songs refer to, and they'll still experience it."

The Rising is out now on Columbia Records.

The boss down under

"We are coming to Australia", Bruce Springsteen confirmed. "I felt bad that we didn't get there last time [we toured]. It was kinda the result of putting the band back together and trying to reconstitute our audience here in the States.

"I still have three young children, which limits our travelling to some degree. We're definitely set up to come in the new year and I know we'll be there. I look forward to seeing all my Australian fans. I'm looking forward to bringing the band down there again. It'll be very exciting."

Bruce Springsteen and the E-Street Band will tour Australia in early 2003.
