---
title: "Springsteen flies solo - and the artist soars"
author: "Greg Kot"
source: "Chicago Tribune"
date: "2005-05-11"
category: "Concert Review"
---

For the first time in 10 years, Bruce Springsteen is going it alone. That means no E Street Band, no "Rosalita" encore, and no clapping, cell-phoning or drinking.

At a sold-out Rosemont Theatre on Wednesday, Springsteen opted for somber reflection, a troubadour plying his deepest thoughts and most pensive songs to a hushed audience. The singer basically told everybody to shut up at the start and cut off liquor sales 10 minutes before show time. He traded his hardest- working-man-in-show-biz uniform for that of a self-serious Artist With Something Important to Say. But Springsteen's folkiest songs are rarely self-important. They are detailed character sketches, rich in imagery that rewards close scrutiny. If there was anything lacking, it's that sometimes he was a bit miserly with his melodies, changing chords all too reluctantly. These weren't hum-in-the-shower pop ditties, and when too many were strung together, monotony threatened. But Springsteen's words were well-chosen, and his singing offered a blend of textures that he couldn't hope to match in a raucous arena concert. Besides his well-worn Dust Bowl mumble, he worked in a haunting falsetto and a rockabilly wail, and exhibited a conversational authority throughout.

Things opened strangely with Springsteen turning "My Beautiful Reward" into a droning ballad on harmonium, then remaking "Reason to Believe" into a scratchy, distorted 78 r.p.m. blues single, with foot stomping percussion. The clenched-teeth vocal style that has marred Springsteen's non-rock recordings constrained the impact of songs such as the title track from his latest album, "Devils & Dust." It's why Springsteen's rare acoustic concerts don't carry as much star-appeal as his much-ballyhooed tours with the E Street Band. But, truth be told, Springsteen could use the break. With the E Streeters, Springsteen sometimes strives too hard to entertain, abandoning his more introspective material and all but quelling his shaggy-dog story-telling banter in order to keep the fans in the third balcony from taking a hot-dog break. But as he began to loosen up at the Rosemont Theatre, the stories began to flow and the songs opened up. The singer telescoped the audience's attention when he seated himself behind a grand piano and rhapsodized about the spell cast by '50s doo-wop recordings, how they featured male singers "attempting to sound like beautiful women ... trying to transcend themselves."

In the same way, Springsteen transcended the obvious by dipping back to his rarely performed "Incident on 57th Street", a rhapsody of possibility that gave way to the collapsed dreams of "The River", and a mournful falsetto coda.

The singer goofed on a topsy-turvy society in which pop culture has been turned into the enemy and surfed the guitar strings with his whammy bar on "Part Monkey, Part Man." He played with percussive force on a black 12-string for "Further On (Up the Road)", wailing like a fugitive who can escape neither the law nor his conscience. It was Springsteen at his acoustic best, the same cold-sweat vibe that made his "Nebraska" album so haunting.

The more intimate atmosphere allowed him to experiment with narrative and song form. At times he flattened melodies unnecessarily, as in the banjo-led "I'm on Fire", further deadened by off-key whistling. But his syncopated tapping and slapping of guitar strings and wood transformed "The Promised Land" into an eerily hypnotic meditation. The experimentation paid off on "Jesus Was an Only Son", which he expanded with additional verses that mused on parenthood.

It was answered by the stark thumb-picking of "The Hitter", in which an estranged son tries to converse with his mother through a locked door. With just his guitar and voice, he built entire worlds out of "Leah", a Roy Orbison-like reverie, and "Matamoros Banks", a Spanish-flavored tale narrated by a ghost. He departed not with a flourish but with an incantation: "Dream, baby, dream, wipe the tears from your eyes." The harmonium droned, and his voice was drenched in reverb. It was like a scene out of a David Lynch movie, a lounge song from a blue-velvet hallucination. It wasn't exactly a classic, E Street-worthy exit. But it was one that won't soon be forgotten by those who witnessed it.
