---
title: "Springsteen Promises '12-Minute Party' at Halftime"
author: "Joe Lapointe"
source: "The New York Times"
date: "2009-01-29"
category: "News"
---

A Super Bowl week that has been largely devoid of excitement and news got a shot of New Jersey adrenalin — reminiscent of last year — when Bruce Springsteen stepped onto a stage Thursday and announced, "If there are going to be a lot of questions about football, this is going to be the shortest press conference, because I don't know anything about it."

That's quite all right; neither do many of those who produce, cover or watch it. But Super Bowl Sunday and all the trimmings is an institutional custom you eventually can't avoid, or resist, even when you have held yourself to a higher standard than the crass commercialism occasionally mixed with patriotic pandering that has long been the nation's most-watched sporting event.

So after long dismissing a gig he described as "playing where the cheerleaders usually go", Bruce Springsteen and his E Street Band will finally do the 12-minute halftime show of Super Bowl XLIII on Sunday, almost two weeks after the politicized rocker reveled in the departure of the 43rd president of the United States.

Springsteen celebrated Barack Obama's ascension to the White House by singing at the inauguration concert, and that was pressure, he said, with "Lincoln staring over your shoulder."

The Super Bowl is just a phalanx of pseudo fans running onto the field and waving on cue. It's an unabashed hard sell, as Springsteen was at least decent enough to note.

"We have a new album coming out", he said. "We have our mercenary reasons, of course."

What the heck, Mick Jagger and Paul McCartney — icons of the band's youth, according to Steven Van Zandt — have already done the halftime show, in back- to-back years. And while I'd like to think that John Lennon would have been a holdout for life, I'm probably kidding myself. Everyone wants to hawk their work before the granddaddy of television audiences, stay relevant in the new media world.

As Springsteen, 59, said: "One of the nice things about the Super Bowl is that it's a place where you go. ..." He didn't finish that thought, just connected it to another. "We've been on the road awhile; we're some old soldiers."

During a news conference that was billed as the band's first since 1987 and was nothing short of hilarious, the Boss reminded the guitarist Nils Lofgren (I can admit to owning one of his distant solo albums, the vinyl kind) that he was not supposed to say that as a resident of Scottsdale, Ariz., he will be rooting for the Cardinals to beat the Steelers.

Not in the contract, Springsteen said with deft comic timing. But who knows, maybe we'll get lucky and there will be at least one bold moment Sunday night when Springsteen goes rogue and rails against — oh, I don't know — offensive Wall Street bonuses, $18.4 billion worth.

Go ahead, Bruce, make those corporate fat cats squirm on their sofas. It's a one-time forum — make a lasting impression. One thing is certain: whatever he may say, he is capable of something far more disquieting than the disrobing of the woman in his band, even if Patti Scialfa happens to be his wife.

I've always thought the Super Bowl and especially its halftime show was, with rare exceptions, a waste of the country's rapt attention. But politics and paychecks aside, give the N.F.L. some credit for getting the right band for a moment in America when everyone could use some impassioned and lyrical reminding of what Springsteen writes beautifully of — daily life struggles.

When the Boss got a reluctant Van Zandt to take the microphone, Silvio of "The Sopranos" said, "I think one of the things that we're kind of proud of is that there's a certain inspirational quality to what we do, and that's because of when we grew up, we had the high standards of the '60s."

Say what you will about the flaws of that decade, at least it generated longstanding ideals more resonant than ever as of two weeks ago. And after a news conference in which normally skeptical reporters sat at the edge of their seats and took cellphone photos of Springsteen and the other seven members of the band, it occurred to me that this was a pretty good match after all.

While the saxophonist Clarence Clemons played football in school (which, according to Springsteen, explained his cane), the Boss last recalled having a fling in his backyard "around the summer of 1958." Not a problem; his band has been a long-running dynasty in its own right, together almost 40 years, with its most junior members, Lofgren and Scialfa, in for the last 25.

"Imagine you're working alongside the same people you were with in high school, for 40 years or so and keeping that together", Springsteen said. "It's the long, long ride — that's what it's all about."

Sounds like a speech a Super Bowl coach would want to deliver Sunday evening in the pregame locker room after months of surviving the brutal N.F.L. season.

Mercenaries, deliver your messages!
