---
title: "The Rising Review"
author: "Sylvie Simmons"
source: "Mojo Magazine"
date: "2002-09-01"
category: "Album Review"
---

"BLOOD", "FIRE", "dust", "dark", "empty" – the same words keep recurring. Lights shutting out, black hole in the sun, buildings burning, that lonely desperation that can drive an atheist to prayer.

This is not the first time Springsteen has written about darkness in the USA; though his songs have always reflected America's glorious myths, he's equally mindful of its grim realities. And reality doesn't come much grimmer than planes ramming skyscrapers, incinerated firefighters, people leaving answering-machine messages then leaping to their deaths.

In the aftermath of September 11, numerous novelists and poets published their writings on the horror, but musicians, largely, stayed silent. Some spoke out, or played fundraisers, but few wrote songs about it. Or if they did, most didn't release them.

Can't say I blame them – there's a fine line between empathy and exploitation, no end of pitfalls in the matter of language, tone and timing. But Springsteen – champion of the common man; nearest damn thing to an East Coast poet laureate – had to do something.

As is his way, he says his piece through adopted characters and their stories: the bitter man in opener 'Lonesome Day' who thought he knew everything about his wife, but now "the joke's on me"; the desperate optimist in 'Mary's Place' who throws a party for his gal, playing all her favourite records, hoping she'll show up ("I drop the needle and pray"); the emergency worker the papers call a hero, broken, propping up a bar in 'Nothing Man'; the widower in dark, menacing rocker 'The Fuse', where anger fuses with sexual need and terror. Hmm, terror – a hazardous area for any American with sympathy for the underdog/ability to see all sides of an argument to venture post-9/11. But Springsteen goes there, singing about bridge-building in 'Let's Be Friends' and 'Worlds Apart', an odd, Middle-Eastern song, like Peter Gabriel backed by The E Street Band.

Yes, the band the Boss let go in 1990 are with him here; wife Patti Scialfa too. Maybe the musical equivalent of the post-disaster desire to be with friends and family; maybe the realisation that a stark, solo Nebraska-style treatment might have been too desolate. The E Streeters sound much as ever – lots of rousing build-ups, soaring sax, big backbeats, bombast. There are more retro-sounding pop-R&B numbers with "sha la la" backing vocals than the subject matter might indicate, a stadium-rocker, some soulful ballads recalling early Van Morrison, and stirring gospel. Closer 'My City Of Ruins', urging us to "rise up", is particularly rousing. In the end The Rising's message – as the other frequently-recurring words "hope", "strength", "faith" and "love" indicate – is one of indomitability.

© Sylvie Simmons, 2002
