---
title: "Come On, Rise Up!"
author: "Scott Tady"
source: "Beaver County Times"
date: "2002-12-04"
category: "Concert Review"
---

Bruce Springsteen waited eight songs Wednesday before delving into his classic rock repertoire. It was a buoyant rendering of "Out on the Street" that sent into rapture the full-house Mellon Arena crowd. To its credit, the crowd also responded enthusiastically to Springsteen's new material, which composed nine of the night's first 15 songs. This show was not just a nostalgia fest, this was a celebration of a still-vital American artist.

Not that Springsteen put on airs like an artist Wednesday, sliding on his knees across the stage and flashing that ornery grin when urging fans to sing along. The Boss arrived for work 45 minutes late, though all was forgiven once the houselights went down, and the first of many "Bruuuuce" cheers arose.

Backed by his trusty E Street band, Springsteen went for the gusto early with a rousing version of "The Rising", the title track of his new CD.

With the band wearing head-to-toe black, the black-vested Springsteen gave the "one-two-three" chant that led the charge into an equally uplifting "Lonesome Day." As a treat to longtime fans, the group played "Surrender" with its memorable line, "We learned more from a three-minute record than we ever learned in school." Midway through that song, Clarence Clemons took his first sax solo, hitting notes that filled the arena in much the same way the Big Man filled out his suit. Springsteen and his wife, Patty Scialfa, stood alone on stage performing the Sept. 11, 2001-inspired song "Empty Sky." Springsteen mournfully played harmonica as Scialfa softened the lyrical blow with soulful vocals.

Springsteen's first big smile of the night came during the next new song, the decisively upbeat "Waitin' on a Sunny Day." From that song on, it was a typical, sweaty, fun-filled Springsteen show. "Badlands" elicited a sing- along, leading smoothly into "Worlds Apart", highlighted by Springsteen, Nils Lofgren and Steven Van Zandt trading fiery guitar licks. Showing their versatility, as well as an awareness of their setting, the band dusted off the song "Youngstown", a moving tribute to the downtrodden Ohio town.

Of course, Springsteen brought onto the stage Pittsburgh buddy Joe Grushecky to play along on their co-written song "Murder Incorporated." Then came the killer package of "Dancing in the Dark", "Glory Days" and "Born to Run." You go to a Springsteen show expecting to see chinks in the armor. Perhaps he's lost a little passion, his voice has gotten rusty or his band isn't quite as tight. Know what? There are no chinks in this armor, in fact, there's still not a better live band in America.

The Rising Tour, which continues halfway into 2003, has grossed $1.1 million so far, making it the second-most-lucrative tour of this year. Only Paul McCartney's $2.1 million tour earned more in 2002, though Sir Paul charged an average of $130 per ticket, far exceeding Springsteen's average $72.15 ticket price.

---
