---
title: "Bruce Springsteen rocks 55,000 at Hampden Park Glasgow"
author: "John Dingwall"
source: "The Daily Record"
date: "2009-07-14"
category: "Concert Review"
---

Scottish football got a new Boss last night - as Bruce Springsteen gave a rock history lesson to 55,000 fans at Hampden Park.

The man behind hits such as Born In The USA played for a sweat-soaked three hours at the home of Scottish football.

And his set list included songs spanning a remarkable five decades.

Bruce, 59, was back in Scotland with his famed E Street Band, including musical director Steven Van Zandt - aka Silvio from The Sopranos.

His sellout European tour included a great performance at the Glastonbury Festival a fortnight ago.

The Boss led the band into Badlands with a cry of: "Is there anybody alive at Hampden."

He then told fans: "Good evening Glasgow, hello Scotland. It's good to be back.

"The mighty E Street Band have come thousands of miles just to be here tonight to fulfil our solemn vow to rock the house. But we're gonna need help and that's why we're going to build a house here in Glasgow.

"We want to take the fear that's out there and build a house of hope. We want to take the hurt and build a house of sexual healing.

"We want to take the blues and sadness that"s out there and build a house of joy. That's a lot of work so we're gonna need help."

After a rapturous sing-along throughout their hit-laden set, he told fans: "Good work Glasgow."

As well as songs from his latest album Working On A Dream and classic hits such as The River, and Cover Me, Bruce worked in a request segment.

He collected placards from fans which included the titles of songs they wanted to hear.

And he created a new band member, handing the mic to a little girl in a cowboy hat to let her lead the chorus of Waiting On A Sunny Day.

They saved Born To Run until close to the end - before the entire band held hands and saluted the crowd that had enjoyed every minute.
