---
title: "Still The Boss: Springsteen Shines"
author: "George Palathingal"
source: "The Sydney Morning Herald"
date: "2013-03-18"
category: "Interview"
---

Rating: 4 out of 5 stars

March 18, Allphones Arena, Olympic Park- Sydney Australia

The circumstances were considerably different to Bruce Springsteen and the E Street Band's last Sydney appearance – or as the man himself described it, "the great power failure of 2003" – at the first of his three-date residency at Allphones. Before some had even made it into the arena Springsteen had banished memories of that Sydney Cricket Ground debacle, standing tall, chopping away at his guitar and beaming like a proud uncle, as he led his legendary band through selections from their brilliant career.

As a songwriter and performer, if perhaps not as a singer, Springsteen is in the form of his life. Still, even though he could have fit all of current album Wrecking Ball into his famously long set and disappointed few, he's evidently as content performing older songs he has played countless times and could be bored of, as he is the fresh material that keeps him vital. Indeed, at a little longer than two-and-a-half hours (without a break), this turned out to be one of the band's shorter shows – but they still gave everyone a memorable night.

Whether crowd-surfing during Hungry Heart or goofing around at the top of Spirit in the Night, Springsteen's enjoyment was infectious. There was cute audience participation in both a 10-year-old girl joining him to sing Waitin"

on a Sunny Day and a young woman joining him for the coda of Dancing in the Dark. And few will forget the sight of 14 of the 18 musicians on stage shuffling from side to side in a simple but enormously likeable bit of formation dancing.

More importantly, the whole band rocked fiercely throughout, from its warm five-piece horn section to its soulful backing singers. Others made valuable contributions with violins, accordions and possibly, on Death to My Hometown, the kitchen sink.

It's easy to forget what a fantastic guitarist Springsteen is himself but he graciously shared that limelight with Nils Lofgren, a whirling dervish on Prove It All Night, and temporary recruit Tom Morello, from Rage Against the Machine. Morello's extra vocals and guitar fireworks on The Ghost of Tom Joad provided one of the highlights of a show truly packed with them.
