---
title: "When the Boss Fell to Earth, He Hit Paradise"
author: "Stephen Holden"
source: "The New York Times"
date: "1992-08-09"
category: "Interview"
---

Last year, shortly before marrying his former backup singer Patti Scialfa, Bruce Springsteen was seized with an intense creative fever.

"It was nine months after my son was born", he recalled recently. "I was a father, and I had a real relationship with Patti, which was something that had evaded me for a long time. I"d just finished the album "Human Touch", but it felt unfinished."

Working with an acoustic guitar and a drum machine, Mr. Springsteen wrote "Living Proof", a majestic rock ballad. A centerpiece of both his live show and new album "Lucky Town", it portrays fatherhood as a transcendent deliverance from a prolonged period of self-doubt and unhappiness.

"I crawled deep into some kind of darkness/ Lookin" to burn out every trace of who I"d been", sings the narrator, who remembers his predomestic life as a prison with "no keys no guards/ Just one frightened man and some old shadows for bars." With the birth of his son, he finds salvation.

"Living Proof" was the key unlocking the door into the next room, where a lot of songs were waiting", Mr. Springsteen continued. "I wrote one a night over the next three weeks, and they became "Lucky Town." The songs deal with a lot of the same spiritual issues that were in "Born to Run."

Lounging on a couch in his spacious dressing room at the Brendan Byrne Arena in New Jersey, before a concert in his sold-out 11-show engagement, which ends tomorrow, Mr. Springsteen reflected on what he said was "the single biggest transition of my life." A painful journey from what he called "the mythic world into the real world", it drove him to seek therapy 10 years ago. He has been in and out ever since.

During the conversation, Mr. Springsteen shrugged off what some have perceived as an impending career crisis. After the albums "Human Touch" and "Lucky Town"

were released by Columbia Records in April, the singer, whom critics had once treated as sacrosanct, received a few rare snipes. The reviews for both albums, though mostly favorable, were not as glowing as those for previous Springsteen records. There were also suggestions that the Boss, now a family man, 42 years old and wealthy to boot (with a $13 million house in Beverly Hills and another home in Rumson, N.J.), had gotten too comfortable and fallen out of touch with his Jersey Shore roots.

The records, which respectively entered Billboard"s pop album chart at No. 2 and No. 3, were beaten out by Def Leppard"s "Adrenalize." When they quickly fell to the lower reaches of the chart, Entertainment Weekly ran a cover story that asked, "What Ever Happened to Bruce?"

"In the mythic world, real things get in the way", Mr. Springsteen said, speaking in a quiet, husky voice while sipping tea and mineral water. "Real people get in the way. Or a real woman. Some people will just be upset by your real life and by the real choices you make because they get in the way of the dream."

Mr. Springsteen has countered his critics with doses of humor. In the opening concert in New Jersey, he invited his audience to boo his move to Beverly Hills. "I can take it", he joked. The notion that Mr. Springsteen has in some way sold out is contradicted by his longtime friend and former E Street bandmate, (Miami) Steve Van Zandt (now known as Little Steven), who helped him remix his current single, "57 Channels (and Nothin" On)", from the "Human Touch" album.

"Bruce is an adult with a wife and kids", he said, "and I think he"d have the same life style whatever town he chose to live in. I don"t think living in California or in New Jersey has much to do with anything."

Trim, with no trace of gray in his hair and a face full of stubble that thickens into a beard, Mr. Springsteen looks considerably younger than his years. If he is now a father of two children (his son, Evan James, born in July 1990, was followed last December by a daughter, Jessica Rae), the aura of a rock-and-roll gypsy still clings to him. Triple-loop silver earrings adorn both ears. He wears a large silver cross around his neck, a loose-fitting open shirt, cuffed blue jeans and weather-beaten black motorcycle boots with metal tips.

Mr. Springsteen, who gives few interviews, takes answering questions seriously. He speaks slowly and deliberately, often pausing to gather his thoughts and making only fleeting eye contact. There is a brooding quality in his deep-set eyes, but it is offset by a generous grin and frequent eruptions of slightly nervous laughter, which carries a note of self-deprecation. He seems intent on projecting the conviction that, despite his fame, he is an ordinary person who has done well because he happens to be good at one thing.

During the interview, he always referred to his musical career as "my job"; to him, that job comes down to communication. "I"ve always believed that people listen to your music not to find out about you", he said, "but to find out about themselves."

In describing his own personal odyssey, Mr. Springsteen unabashedly compared it with sea changes in the national consciousness. The myth that fueled his early music, and that ultimately became a burden, can be traced to American pop culture itself.

"As a child, I felt the myth coming from everywhere, especially from television westerns with those big landscapes", he said. "In rock music it was Chuck Berry, the cars, the guitars, the girls, the sense of endless highway and endless night and sexual power. I believe it was something that everybody felt, and, of course, it was a romanticized view. It lasted until the 60"s.

Then in the 70"s people really began to feel that there wasn"t going to be enough for everybody."

For Bruce Springsteen, maturing has involved "sorting out the images of manhood that are thrown at you in a little town in New Jersey", he said.

"There was the car thing. I wasn"t what you would call a car freak, as far as building them goes, but I was taken with the image."

"Born to Run", the 1975 album that made him a star, codifies the myth of a rebellious young dreamer charging down the American highway in a quest for adventure. But barely seven years after its release, the singer took a cross- country trip during which his fantasies of leading an eternal rock-and-roll caravan came to an end.

"I was 32, and I wasn"t a kid anymore", he said. "At the same time I wasn"t attached and didn"t have a home life. For a couple of thousand dollars I bought a car and drove it across the country with a friend from North Jersey who ran a motorcycle shop. One day in the South we stopped by a river bank where some band whose name I forget was playing. I walked around the crowd and felt vey detached and far away. I had that sinking feeling that something had gone fundamentally wrong."

Throughout the rest of the trip, he said, "I experienced a lot of bad feelings. It was an empty, floating feeling, like I had gotten lost. We finally got to California where I had a small house. And when we walked in, I couldn"t sit down. I realized that the only thing I wanted to do was to get back in the car and go back the other way. And when I got home toNew Jersey, I knew I wouldn"t want to stay there either."

That fall of 1982, Mr. Springsteen said, was when "I found a doctor and started to talk to him."

Since then, his life has been something of an emotional roller coaster, "finding some stuff out", as he puts it, "and then running away."

One exhilarating compensation was the Brucemania that accompanied the overwhelming success of his 1984 album "Born in the U.S.A." The record sold 21 million copies worldwide, 11 million of them in the United States, and made him a pop megastar surpassed by only Michael Jackson.

The album"s cover image of Mr. Springsteen as a working-class hero with bulging biceps and tight jeans made him such an appealing icon of American machismo that both political parties angled for an endorsement in that year"s Presidential election. He did not back anyone.

When asked whom he would support this year, he hedged. "I don"t come out and promote politicians", he said. "But I"m not voting for Bush. The last time I voted was in "72, for McGovern. This year I am going to vote."

Mr. Springsteen played the role of the working-class hero for a while, but "it"s not the way I grew up", he admitted. "I wasn"t one of the guys or anything like that. I was a quiet, keep-to-myself kind of kid, and in a certain sense I was fragile. But during the "Born in the U.S.A." period I was doing a lot of physical things and exercising. I still do it, but in a more balanced sort of way."

In 1987, he released "Tunnel of Love", a compelling chronicle of the ups and downs of a troubled relationship not unlike his with Julianne Phillips, an actress and model whom he married in 1985. He insists, however, that the songs were not strictly autobiographical.

After the couple divorced in 1989, Mr. Springsteen married Ms. Scialfa, a willowy, redheaded singer and guitarist who had sung backup on his 1988 "Tunnel of Love" tour with the E Street Band. Mr. Springsteen also separated from his longtime musical cohorts; only one member of the original E Street Band, the keyboardist Roy Bittan, plays with his current band. Although some fans saw the breakup as Mr. Springsteen"s rejection of his roots, Mr. Van Zandt, who left the E Street Band in 1983, was supportive.

"He had been doing one thing for a long time, and he wanted to try something new", he said. "I don"t think it"s anything more dramatic than that."

Mr. Springsteen has shown a deep streak of caution when it comes to tampering with his music or drawing on other art forms. Talking about literature that has impressed him, he cites the Canadian poet Leonard Cohen"s album "I"m Your Man", but he is unfamiliar with Robert Bly"s "Iron John."

"I like to read, but I don"t do it, and it"s one of the worst things I don"t do", he lamented.

Although he is more in touch with movies than with books, he has no plans to be in one. With his New Jersey accent and the aura he wears of the rebel hood with the heart of gold -- Mr. Springsteen would seem an ideal choice to play one of Martin Scorsese"s urban street characters or one of Sam Shepard"s loners. In fact, his videos have revealed a telegenic star quality that is unconnected to music. But he claims that that kind of stardom holds little allure. "My experience with video has been that film is complicated and you have less control", he said. "It would be a very new form for me, when I feel I haven"t gotten near to exhausting the one I"m in."

The contemporary film that has left the deepest impression on him is Wim Wenders"s "Wings of Desire", whose story he feels parallels many of his own concerns.

"It"s about an angel who gives up his wings to experience mortality", he explained. "To experience love and beauty, he has to accept temporalness.

These are some of same issues I"ve tried to get at on my new records. I think one of the issues that is facing not only individuals but the whole country is that things are finite."

The creative dry spell that coincided with Mr. Springsteen"s personal tumult ended when he began writing the songs for "Human Touch", a turbulent album that took more than a year to record, beginning in January 1990. But when it was completed, he decided to delay its release until the second album, "Lucky Town", was complete.

"I still felt I was dancing all around things I really wanted to say but didn"t quite know how", he said. "For me, "Lucky Town" was more emotionally realized."

Both of his new albums almost totally ignore the electronic innovations that have colored much of 90"s pop, though he is a fan of some new pop music. "For me, rap is the stuff that gets closest to the vitality of 50"s rock-and-roll.

It"s the rawest, most direct kind of in-your-face, bursting-off-the-street sound." He remembers watching Public Enemy on television recently. "When they came on, they felt like what I imagined Dylan must have felt like in the 60"s, real timely and comedic and darkly funny, with a tremendous sense of energy."

He"s only vaguely familiar with Billy Ray Cyrus, the country star whose voice reminds some of Mr. Springsteen"s. "It"s real healthy right now out there", he said, adding that Guns "n" Roses, Metallica and Nirvana are "really good bands who have something to say and who really mean something in their fans" lives."

Mr. Springsteen sees his own albums as soul-and-blues-influenced ("Human Touch") and part of the folk-rock tradition ("Lucky Town"). Said Jon Landau, Mr. Springsteen"s manager and co-producer: "Bruce"s preoccupation is, above all, his writing. If the song is right, that"s 80 percent of it for him. In our approach to production you won"t find much that gets in the way of the song." In fact, "Lucky Town", on which Mr. Springsteen played most of the instruments, sounds like the homemade album that it is. Though one of Mr.

Springsteen"s most brilliant collections of songs, it lacks the commercial sheen that might have made its catchiest songs radio-ready hits.

With the onset of the tour, which is expected to continue through North America into 1993, sales of Mr. Springsteen"s two albums have begun to pick up. In the New York market, after only two concerts, both albums saw an increase of more than 80 percent in sales from the previous week. In the United States, "Human Touch" and "Lucky Town" have sold, respectively, 1.7 million and 1.6 million copies. Together, that is more than "Tunnel of Love."

Overseas sales for the two new albums are well over four million.

The New Jersey concerts, which draw heavily on material from the two albums, open with three songs from "Lucky Town" and close with back-to-back renditions of "Born to Run" and "My Beautiful Reward", the tender, searching ballad that closes "Lucky Town." Mr. Springsteen said he sees the two songs, and their albums, as bookends.

"In 1974, I was a 24-year-old sitting on my bed in Long Branch, N.J., saying, "Hey, I want to know if love is real", " he said. "If you listen to "Born to Run", that"s the question the song asks. If you"ve followed my characters over the years, you could see them struggling and failing and losing each other and finding each other again, and losing themselves and finding themselves i pursuit of some sort of answer to that question. I felt that if you had followed my characters all the way back to "Born to Run", "Lucky Town" was the place where they were going."
