---
title: "The Sprucing Of The Springbean"
author: "Charles Shaar Murray"
source: "NME"
date: "1975-10-11"
category: "Commentary"
---

BRUCE SPRINGSTEEN: Man, Myth or Monster? CHARLES SHAAR MURRAY reports from Houston, Texas

THE FURTHER west you get the worse off you are without a car.

In Houston, Texas, if you ain't got wheels you are one hundred per cent screwed; you mooch down the street past the massage parlours and churches kicking at abandoned beer cans and looking for a place to eat after midnight (room service cuts off at 12, y'see).

You mooch along until you find a drive-in diner with a vaguely surreal patio full of hacked and crumbling white plaster tables and chairs, where they give you a free milkshake (chocolate, stawberry or vanilla) if you order the steak sandwich.

So you go ahead and order it and you find out why the 'shakes are free (they're god awful is why) and you sit there and smoke a cigarette in the wild spooky Texas night and start thinking about Bruce Springsteen.

NINETY minutes earlier, you'd been in the Music Hall, a 4,000-seater Houston hall where the aforementioned Spruce Stringbean had played the second of two packo-sellout gigs.

You know what happens at certain gigs when you're sitting there and you hear someone blissfully clapping time imperceptively close to you and you look down and find that it's you? The Springsteen gig was one of those. One of those dream gigs when a performer schleps his reality and his environment onto the stage with him and manages to interlock his universe with his listeners'.

After seeing Springsteen you realise that his records are dumb and irrelevant; forget 'em, they're trash, they're a shadow show in a distorting mirror, and he's not really there at all. It's possible to hear his records and hardly dig him at all; it ain't possible to see his show and walk out quite the same.

I mean, the cat is good.

Let's you and me check out some charts. In the latest Cash Box Top 100 albums, Bruce's new album Born To Run is in at number ten (with a bullet, of course). Last week it was at 31, and the week before that it wasn't even in the goddam shops. His two previous albums, The Wild, The Innocent And the E. Street Shuffle and Greetings From Asbury Park N.J. are at 85, and 100 respectively. Also with bullets.

Let's try Billboard. There we find Born To Run at eight (with a bullet) up from 84 on its second week on the charts. The other two albums are bulleted at 98 and 99. In Record World, the new album is at three up from ten, while the oldies are in at 113 and 123.

The weird thing is that neither of those first two albums even made the top 200 when they first came out. In its first six months, Greetings sold all of 50,000 copies, which for America is a rotten sale.

It was even money that CBS were going to drop Springsteen when Clive Davis fell, because he was a rookie act with a flop album who'd been one of Clive's pet prodigies. Still, a few folks in the company thought the boy was really something and hung in there, and now the CBS people are portentiously intoning stuff about how Brucie's too big to do any but the most carefully selected interviews and no, you can't take any off-stage photos. Sorry.

Pure '72 Tony DeFries.

Anyway, for those of you who simply remember Springbruce as one of the '73 class of new Dylans, it's Fax Time on WNME. Springsteen is a 25-year-old bona- fide street-punk from Freehold, New Jersey. Freehold is just down the road from Ashbury Park, a real under-the-broadwalk street paradise full of clubs, pinball arcades, beaches and hotnight streetcorner Americana of all description. Ashbury Park is Springsteen's sourcepoint; an environment that he recreates in the riotous r 'n' b punk ballet of his stage show.

Really, it's that thing that makes the difference between his records (which don't make it) and his stage show (which does); on record he comes on like some kind of sensitive singer-songwriter with a mental block about ever leaving anything at all out of a song. Good idea, bad idea, no damn idea at all, sling it in, man, it'll fit. Except that the good lines were so good that it left a bad taste in the ear when they were juxtaposed with the bad ones.

The songs on the new album are a lot more tasteful, but the ponderous mock- Spector arrangements are from hunger.

The trouble was that the quality of Springsteen's best work made it mandatory to judge the rest of his work by that standard. Yer average turkey rock act can be patted on the back if it manages to haul one good song out of the garbage heap of its regular output, but when Springsteen was goood he was so good that he made you hate him for not being that good all the time. Just as it was impossible to take the more outrageous claims of his supporters seriously when sitting at home checking out his records, it was likewise impossible to write him off.

I mean, new Dylan, new Schmylan; I get uptight when I hear anyone touted as the new anything. It's one thing to say that someone occupies an equivalent position to some famous biggie in terms of the context of today's music scene, or whatever, but whenever I hear that "new Beatles/new Dylan-/new Stones" jive I hang up and walk out.

SO I WAS pissed off with Springsteen right up front because of the outrageous disservice that his more vocal admirers were doing him, saddling the poor kid with a label that he just couldn't live up to, no way. Plus it didn't even sound as if he was trying to live up to it in the first place.

The strongest vibe that I got off Springsteen's records was that he was the best new white R&B voice/musical identity that I'd heard in a long time. And I was blown over when I saw him live and discovered that the aspect of his work that had impressed me the most was in fact, the deepest and most central core of his work.

Let's get to it: Springsteen has the finest understanding of black music – not just the sound of it, but the philosphy and ethics of the modern R&B show – of any white act since the J. Geils Band.

He also has stage presence like only a handful of '70s acts have it – Bowie, Patti Smith, Bob Marley Brilleaux/Johnson, Labelle, Alex Harvey, (curiously, the SAHB display an instinctive grasp of the philosophy of R&B choreography even though they don't play no R&B). Plus he's got a great voice and a kick- ass band.

ANYWAY, HE comes on stage slouching and bowlegged and akimbo in jeans and leathers, wispy beard and pirate earring, and the first thing is that I'm surprised by how small he is. He does 'Incident On 57th Street' all alone at the centre mike with just his piano player Roy "The Professor" Bittan, and he's doing anexcellent impersonation of a cat who's all limbs that he doesn't know what to do with.

His feet shuffle, his face scews up like an old glove, he doesn't know what to do with his hands, he twitches. Then the band come on and their presence seems to give him confidence and he sneakslides into his stylised strut: where street body movement extends into the dancing zone.

The song is 'Tenth Avenue Freeze-Out', off the new album (the album version reflects the Springsteen stage vibe far better than most of his recordings, incidentally). By now he's got one of those po' boy slouch caps hanging off the side of his head, and he's well in to his definitive onstage characterisaion: sassy street dude deluxe in his tennis shoes laying down his jive and talking trash on the corner, all good peer group stuff, working off of the two main guys in his group (known, quite logically in terms of Springsteen's Asbury mythology, as the E. Street Band).

The ones I'm talking about are Miami Steve (guitar), a sharp-lookin' mofo in an ice-cream gangster suit, who used to play with Springsteen in his New Jersey bar band days and Clarence Clemons (saxophone). Now Clemons is not only the cat whose musical contributions invariably kick the numbers into overdrive, but he's Springsteen's most effective visual foil onstage.

He's a huge black Man-Mountain, magisterially duded up in a white suit, hat and shoes, and I think they use ultra-violet lights on him to let him gleam spookily through even when the stage is at its most dimly lit.

He looks like the living incarnation of R&B, does Clemons. If you want a perfect indication of what R&B means to its most devoted white enthusiasts, all you need is a picture of Clarence Clemons. He looks just like you always wished King Curtis did.

And in terms of the theatre of Springsteen's show, whenever he and Clemons give each other five or fall into a snatch of soul dancing or bump into each other, it's as if the Great Spirit of R&B was smiling on this white-punk upstart from under the boardwalk.

Clemons is a mainman; he plays hot, raucous, steamy R&B tenor the way it was meant to be played. Springsteen says, "Clarence plays the notes you want to hear", and he's dead-on right.

Springsteen pulls off his first real and deadly coup de theatre early on in the set, during 'Spirit In The Night' (a song from Greetings and still one of his best), taken kinda looser and shakier than before.

Springsteen works the front of the stage when he comes to that slowed-down last verse, sitting there dangling his legs off the edge, and as he comes to the line "Ran into the lake in just his socks and his shirt", he changes "lake" to "pit" and – kthunk – right on the word "pit" he drops down into the photo pit (which doesn't actually have any photographers in it, just a coupla black cops looking totally confused).

The words "in his socks and shirt" come with agonised slowness from nowhere – no-one can see him, where the hell did that sonovabitch get to? – until you see fingers clawing at the other lip of the pit and arms reach down and haul Springsteen up until he's perched, on the edge right up against the front row.

He turns his head and peeks over his leather shoulder with a real sly "Heyyyyyyyyy, man" street grin, and wriggles out of the front row's dutches, drops back into the pit and hauls himself back on to the stage just as we band rampages back into the chorus with Springsteen wildly strutting back and forth across the stage.

Man, did they love that bit! Springsteen isn't – yet – the kind of act who needs to be afraid to go right down into his audience, as opposed to having them that tantalizing handtouch that's the rock and roll equivalent of the limp-fish wave that the Queen gives the plebs during state visits.

It's a nice little populist touch, a '70s visual-aid version of those horrible "Hey-man-we're-all-one-man" raps that at turkey hippie bands used to lazy down during the more excessive moments of the '60's, but it was done with flash and stagecraft shrewdness of the kind that – it needs to be said again – are more common to black acts.

When Springsteen is at his best he's funky and when he's funky he's at his best.

Believe it.

When he does a classic oldie, like 'Pretty Flamingo' played cool and sweet and steady he snaps it straight in to his own mythology.

He prefaced it with a long rap about how he and Miami Steve useta lounge on the front porch with their guitars and watch this chick sashay by; and even though everybody there knew that Springsteen hadn't written the song (at least, I hope they knew), it had become his by osmosis; it clearly existed as part of the same cultural universe as his own songs, came from the same race.

The absolute highest moment of the set was 'The E Street Shuffle', which expanded outwards from the bubbling, happy disco item that it was on the album to a whole ballet street parable.

It started out with Springsteen draped against a mike stand with his cap askew on his head (the cap was almost visual code that he was gonna be at his most theatrically street), reminiscing about his early bands down in Ashbury Park, New Joisey and the clubs that he used to play, like "The Student Prince" and how his band couldn't get work because they played Chuck Berry and R&B instead of Top 40 and Vanilla Fudge.

...And how he and Miami Steve started out with a ten-piece band and gradually got down to a five-piece because people kept drifting away as the money got worse.

He and Steve mime bopping down the street wondering what their band lacked and then you see the gigantic figure of Clemons looming out of the darkness just outside the spotlight.

They quiver and quake in awe, all with a running commentary from Springsteen (who, incidentally, is a great raconteur) until Steve and Clemons do a slow motion soul-slap. And that the precise moment that their hands meet over Springsteen's head, he drops into a crouch and whispers, "Sparks only on E Street..." and it really is one of the all-time magic moments, bettered only by the bit where Springsteen drinks from a paper cup and flips it over his shoulder without a backward glance and it lands right side up.

BRUCE SPRINGSTEEN'S been playing in bar bands since he was 15. He knows every bar band trick in the look, all the old rock-'em-sock-'em scams that you have to use to draw the patrons attention out of their glasses and onto the stage. If you can really and truly pull that one off in the bars, then you're gonna go great in a concert hall, where the audience already has its attention focussed on you.

Springsteen's totally hip to that. Apart from the two numbers ('Thunder Road' from the new album, which acts as a breather about halfway through his set, and the aforementioned 'Incident On 57th Street') that he performs with only piano accompaniment, he never lets up on his audience, never stops working the hall, makes sure that there's always something cooking on stage, no dead space at all.

It's pure comin'-straight-atcha-look-out stuff, the purest assimilation and distillation of the styles and ambience of timeless uptown-Saturday-night classic R&B that I've seen from any white act since the heyday of J. Geils.

Whether lease-lending from Chuck Berry's 'Come On' with 'Backstreets' or Bo Diddley on 'She's The One' or playing a searingly sweet Albert King/'Ain't No Sunshine' intro to 'Kitty's Back', Springsteen has a totally sure command of his idiom.

He presents a perfect white interpretation of black music for white people, which ties up perfectly with his articulate-punk persona, as per all those CBS posters of Bruce standing lonesome in the street with a beat-up pair of sneakers dangling from the head of his vintage Fender Esquire (a perfect punk guitar, by the way; a Les Paul would look far too serious-musicianly for a punk image).

The only trouble with the whole trip of Springsteen as ultimate punko deluxe is that his portrayal is too detailed and his songs are too sentimental and too articulate, (cf John Lennon's remark about how you could always recognise an actor because of the way their faces moved). Real punks are more like the Ramones or Television; they're so snotty that they couldn't even give a shit about whether you really consider them to be real street punks or not.

Plus they write in platitudes, which is great, because the last thing on their minds is getting poetically agonized about their punkhood. Springsteen provides such a finely detailed larger-than-life portrait of a punk that he overkills his own verisimilitude.

In a way, the street-rock of Springsteen is the exact polar opposite of the street-rock of Lou Reed. Reed presents himself as having gone through so much as to have become totally deadened to everything – cocooned so smoothly in his insulating smack bubble that he's an utterly dispassionate observer of everything that passes before his senses, detached to the point where all perspective vanishes and all events are of equal importance (the same trick that Vonnegut pulled in Breakfast Of Champions, in a way).

Springsteen, on the other hand, lives in the same world, but he attempts to turn the streets and alleys of New York and Ashbury Park into a highly coloured, magical wonderland of a bizarre beauty and terror.

Where Reed flattens it out, Springsteen imbues it with a vital, three- dimensional life. It's the exact opposite of the jaded I've-tried-everything- twice-and-got-bored-with-it-the-first-time-pass-the-valium school of eleganza sleaze rock, and when that energy is hung off a stone good-time R&B show, then Christ don't it make ya feel good.

That's why the records don't make it. On the records the focus is on Bruce the soulful poet rather than on Springsteen the whompin' stompin' R&B man. On record you can spot every strained lyric, every overblown image, every little error of judgement. On stage, you just don't give a shit as long as Clemons is honking and Bruce is struttin' and Miami Steve is layin' down that sweet sweet groove.

THE TROUBLE with Springsteen's new album is that it sounds as if he'd been told too often how important he is and as a result has set out to write important songs and make an important record. "It's hard to be a saint when you're just a poor boy on the street", wrote Springsteen on his first album, but the converse holds true: it's hard to be a poor boy on the street when the people who surround you are telling you that you're a saint, or at the very least, a big-ass rock and roll star.

The vitality of the whole Springsteen ambience is dependent on his street empathy, and the bigger Springsteen gets, the more he's going to see of limousines and fancy hotels and record company people who fall over themselves to tell him he's wonderful, and the less he's going to see of the environment from which he drains his energy. The benefits that accrue to musicians because of the thing that they do well can all too easily incapciate them from doing that thing any longer, because it isolates them from the circumstances that made them want/need to do that thing in the first place.

And then they end up playing the part of the person they used to be, playing it parrot fashion as if they'd learned it from someone else's records and videotapes, and as like as not the audiences don't know the difference and couldn't give a shit as long as they get what they came to see, and the record company sycophants and PR people don't care as long as dem ol' units keep getting shipped coast to coast.

Springsteen's probably got a way to go before any of that starts happening to him, but happen it will; both because of the nature of his music and because of the way one or two people in his record company are unintentionally liable to kill the goose that lays the gold albums.

See, Springsteen's early songs were written about his present; his next album will have to be written about his past, because his new present will consist of the rock star life. If he draws on that, then we're liable to end up with a clutch of Ian Hunter-type songs about the angst of the rock star, and Ian's already done that number to perfection.

It's a problem that doesn't arise for the likes of, say, Elton, because there's nothing street about him or his show and he certainly isn't presenting himself as a cat off the block.

Springsteen is, and soon as he ceases to be a down-in-the-alley dude, he'll either have to become something else or else resign himself to becoming just another elegant phoney.

ONE OF the worries I have about Springsteen is that he may never make the record that hits as hard as his stage show. None of his albums pack more than a flyweight punch, and the only possible reason for listening to any of them is so that you know the songs when you see him – that is, if you see him.

The CBS guy was of the opinion that it wasn't necessary for Springsteen to do anything more than a TV special – over which, naturally, he must have "total control" – and a London show or two.

Playing Glasgow or Manchester is "not necessary" – just as doing any but the safest patty-cake interviews is "not necessary". Just as, if he had a good live album out, listening to any of his studio albums would be "not necessary".

Still, you gotta see his show when he brings it over, because Bruce Springsteen and his R&B Punk Ballet Company is one of the best things I've ever seen on a rock and roll stage.

Hey, Bruce – just remember who you say you are and keep yer nose clean. And don't believe more than half of what they tell you.

© Charles Shaar Murray, 1975
