---
title: "Ranking Springsteen's Albums"
author: "Neil McCormick"
source: "Daily Telegraph"
date: "2014-06-04"
category: "Opinion"
---

Thirty years after Born In The USA was first released, Neil McCormick counts down The Boss's album

The cover may be the most famous posterior shot in the history of pop, defining Bruce Springsteen's image as a red, white and blue American icon, a buff working-class hero. Released on June 4 1984, Born In The USA confirmed Springsteen's status as a stadium rock superstar. His seventh album, its mix of anthemic socio-political rock and songs of personal struggle, bolstered with snappy pop melodies and dynamic production, helped to make it the biggest selling album in the world in the year of its release. With more than 30 million satisfied customers to date, it remains the biggest selling of his long career. But is it really his best ever? Springsteen has made 18 studio albums over a 41-year recording career. Here, Neil McCormick rates them all.

**18\. Human Touch (1992)**

Springsteen is the rarest of popular music artists, always committed to searching for something magical. But all things are relative and Human Touch is relatively weak, almost like someone impersonating Springsteen, with all the right moves but no shadows, little substance and no surprises. Following two decades of incredible success, Springsteen broke up the long-serving E Street Band and produced this slick, plastic album investigating straightforward ideas of love and commitment. But the title track is a belter and there are lost gems in 57 Channels, With Every Wish and Pony Boy.

**17\. High Hopes (2014)**

Springsteen's latest album sounds fantastic with Rage Against the Machine's Tom Morello bringing a contemporary art-rock edge to the E Street roots. A collection of re-recorded odds and ends, it doesn't really have a central narrative thrust and is only ever as good as individual songs like American Skin, Down In The Hole and Hunter of Invisible Game (all rejected from earlier albums). It's no classic but I've never heard a Springsteen album I didn't like and, despite its lack of focus, High Hopes is no exception.

**16\. Lucky Town (1992)**

Springsteen seemed uncharacteristically uncertain of his direction in the Nineties. After spending a long time in the studio crafting the below-par Human Touch, he dashed off this raw companion piece in just two weeks, then released them both together. Lucky Town is the more ragged and lively of the two, with some great songs including the inspirational If I Should Fall Behind and the rocking title track. Perhaps if Springsteen hadn't been distracted by divorce, remarriage and children, he might have taken the best of the two albums, recorded it all properly with his band, and created another classic.

**15\. Working On A Dream (2009)**

This is Springsteen's most romantic and least political album, where he whoops it up with the E Street Band to a degree that verges on parody, especially on biker anthem Outlaw Pete. I suspect this is what people who don't listen to Springsteen think he sounds like all the time, a gruff Roy Orbison delivering operatic rock 'n' roll about the glory of the American dream. All that said, what's wrong with celebrating the good things in life? The band are in fine fettle and the dark shadows of underlying desperation that occasionally loom on a track like Life Itself add weight to the uplifting pleasures of giddier songs like Queen Of The Supermarket, where The Boss drives a shopping cart rather than a Cadillac.

**14\. Greetings From Asbury Park NJ (1973)**

I suppose there are those who would consider it sacrilege to suggest Springsteen's charming but wayward debut is not a classic but, compared to later offerings, it's an enthusiastic, wordy, over-written mess from an artist still looking for an identity somewhere between Van Morrison and Bob Dylan.

The prescient producer and critic Jon Landau saw enough to declare him rock 'n' roll's future and it remains a colourful, poetic calling card.

**13\. Devils & Dust (2005)**

Even this comparatively minor semi-acoustic album of character vignettes has a seriousness and focus that Springsteen's ebullient debut lacks. Most of these songs are leftovers from his unproductive Nineties, so it represents where his muse was taking him before 9/11 changed his course. There is a dour, melancholic quality to his tales from a lost America, evoking a hard nostalgia for less complicated yet apparently no happier times. Far from the urban automotive heartland of his early work, Springsteen sings of horses and old cowboys, workers and drifters, men who can't escape the tough choices of their pasts. The songs are structurally simple, lyrically and melodically direct, yet every now and then he still pulls out something like Reno, the forensic tale of a lonely man's encounter with a prostitute, to remind you that he is working at a level way beyond most of his contemporaries.

**12\. Magic (2007)**

Recorded with the E Street Band, Magic is a record grappling with a nation at war on two fronts – Afghanistan and Iraq – and beset by self-doubt on the home front. The sombre title track, depicting a devilish magician pulling the wool over his audience's eyes, remains one of the sharpest commentaries on the George W Bush presidency ("Trust none of what you hear / Less of what you see"). It's a punchy, dramatic collection, with aggressive rock like Radio Nowhere and Last To Die leavened by the shimmery pop of Girls In Their Summer Clothes and Livin' In The Future. It falls some way short of classic Bruce status, however. A few too many songs are content to state the obvious, and the digital 21st-century production robs the E Street Band of its character, making the players sound like generic rockers.

**11\. We Shall Overcome: The Seeger Sessions (2006)**

It starts with laughter, and this may the most purely joyous album Springsteen has ever made. Recorded in a barn on his New Jersey farm with a huge ensemble of traditional musicians, mainly uncelebrated locals and friends of friends, it's a journey of musical exploration for Springsteen himself, the rock 'n"

roll hero diving deep into American roots (and its Irish and English folk antecedents) by investigating the catalogue of the great folk activist and archivist Pete Seeger. With fiddles, horns, gospelly chorus vocals and jazzy New Orleans-style drumming, it is loose and rousing stuff, a freewheeling celebration of great music with a fantastically unhinged spirit. Springsteen's only album of covers, the connection to his own oeuvre is evident, and it hints at the overtly political and religious spirit of his greatest late works.

**10\. The Ghost Of Tom Joad (1995)**

In an unproductive recording decade, during which Springsteen focused on family matters, this remains a quiet and minimalistic classic, featuring subdued, semi-acoustic deliveries of resonant songs about harsh lives in a version of America that has no time for dreams. Springsteen's lifelong interest in John Steinbeck was triggered by his childhood viewing of John Ford's Grapes Of Wrath, and Springsteen uses the novel's central character, Tom Joad, as a symbol of social justice in difficult times. The whole album has an underlying strength and deep humanist vision. It is a pivotal work in the second half of his stellar career.

** 9\. The Wild, The Innocent & The E Street Shuffle (1973)**

Just a few months had passed since his flamboyant debut, but on his next album Springsteen's vision is coming into focus and the E Street Band is taking shape. Jazzier, funkier and wilder than anything that was to follow – although still overly indebted to Van Morrison and Bob Dylan – this is Springsteen's freshest, freest album, ebulliently mythologising the cultural and musical landscape of his youth. It may lack the authority and gravitas of the man they came to call The Boss, but it's a delightful introduction to one of the most charismatic characters in rock.

**8\. Tunnel Of Love (1987)**

The comedown after the stadium excesses of the first phase of Springsteen's superstardom, Tunnel Of Love is the introverted, self-doubting mirror image of the fist-waving Born In The USA. Beginning the process of breaking up the E Street Band, Springsteen plays most of the instruments himself, utilising drum machines and synths, which perhaps adds to the sense of psychological claustrophobia. Springsteen's divorce album, written as his marriage to actress Julianne Phillips fell apart, every song is a carefully turned gem, taking us on a journey from giddy romantic dreams to careworn domestic disarray, adding up to a brooding contemplation of the essential unknowability of others. Songs like the title track and the devastating Brilliant Disguise offer a compelling depiction of vulnerability from a man often considered a tower of strength.

**7\. The River (1980)**

The title track is my personal favourite Springsteen ballad, a deep, bruised, epic depiction of how life kills romance that makes me gasp and swoon every time I hear it. This double album was an ambitious attempt to mix the sweet and sour, to set the jubilant pop music Springsteen had grown up with against the economic harshness of working-class life, a kind of musical answer to the paradox of the American dream. The results (like most double albums) are a bit baggy and for every moment of pure pop joy (Hungry Heart), hypnotic drama (Point Blank) and brooding contemplation (Wreck On The Highway) there's a neat throwaway rocker like Sherry Darling or Crush On You.

**6\. Nebraska (1982) ** A sparse, unforgiving masterpiece recorded solo on a fuzzy four-track cassette machine, this may be the greatest and is almost certainly the most celebrated low fidelity album ever made. Working on a follow-up to epic double set The River, Springsteen was unsatisfied with the full-blooded band arrangements of his songs of loss and desolation, and boldly decided to release the minimalist demos instead. His socio-political vision growing darker with each release, here he gives us Reagan's America in road songs that are running out of road.

There is a haunting quality to Springsteen's vocals and the echoing guitar on these uncluttered songs. They burn with the deep truth of folk music. In 1982, it sounded shocking in its simplicity. Three decades later, it sounds eternal.

**5\. The Rising (2002)**

Springsteen's astonishing, emotive response to 9/11 ushered in the most productive era of his career. Before The Rising, he hadn't released an album in seven years, or made one with the E Street Band in 18. He wrote and recorded this incredibly moving song cycle of loss, hope and redemption in just six months in the immediate aftermath of the greatest tragedy of modern America. He has told a story of how, a few days after the attack, a stranger in a car stopped next to him, rolled down his window and said, "We need you now." It is hard to imagine any other musician being called on in this way and Springsteen responded with a compassionate epic to match his greatest works, spanning intimacy and exultation, from the quiet heroism of Nothing Man to the gospel charge of My City Of Ruins.

**4\. Born In The USA (1984)**

Thirty years on, it still rocks. Born In The USA remains the most tightly honed of Springsteen's albums, the songs taut and economical, glistening with pop hooks and burnished with a dynamic Eighties sound. It successfully synthesises the two disparate strands of The River and comes up with something that manages to be both angry and celebratory, often in the same song. It is an album of glittering paradoxes, not least in the rage underpinning a sing- along title anthem that was wilfully misinterpreted by many on the American Right. Romance (Cover Me), defeat (Downbound Train), stoicism (Working On The Highway), lust (I'm On Fire), bittersweet nostalgia (Bobby Jean), frustration and longing (Dancing in The Dark) and a heart-swelling acceptance of personal identity (My Hometown), all wrapped up with slick pop production.

**3\. Wrecking Ball (2012)**

Springsteen's most overtly political album, a rousing protest against bankers, unemployment, economic blight, the global financial crisis and the failure of the political classes to protect the working class. On the title track, Springsteen twice exhorts listeners to "hold tight to your anger", replacing some of the poetic ambiguity of earlier accounts of harsh times with a direct, plain-speaking approach. Some may argue that this is a retrograde step but it adds up to a collection of real power. Taking on board the musical influences of the Seeger sessions, the E Street Band has swelled to effortlessly encompass shades of Latino, Tex-Mex, Country & Western, Celtic folk and gospel. It may well be the defining album of an ageing American icon who simultaneously embodies stirring frontier patriotism and brooding liberal doubt.

**2\. Born To Run (1975)**

For Springsteen's early fans, this will always be the one, the album where he became The Boss. The sound of the E Street Band really takes flight with long, flowing piano passages and that rasping, heroic saxophone, while Springsteen finally finds his own original voice, a gruff street poet who can find a melody in a growl and a howl, facing down a wall of sound. Perhaps his most uplifting and idealistic set of songs, this is where Springsteen hones in on the romance of escape from grim fate, a young man who still wants to believe in American dreams and all the possibilities of another life somewhere down the Thunder road, because "tramps like us, baby we were born to run." And run.

**1\. Darkness On The Edge Of Town (1978)**

This is the one for me. As a young 17-year-old punk, it hit me at the right moment with the right hard edge, opening up streams of American music that have enriched my life ever since. It is grittier than his more aspirational early recordings, connecting to the harder economic mood of the times, reflecting his growing politicisation, and compressing the sound of the E Street Band into something richer, sleeker and tougher. Candy's Room demonstrates what a dazzling outfit they have become: a dark tale of a young man's love for a prostitute, driven by a racing hi-hat that contrasts with a low, almost spoken, half-speed vocal, until it explodes into full band roar as Springsteen declares "what she wants is me." It's a kind of concept album of American failure, life in the Badlands, where Adam Raised A Cain, where wasted youth are Racing In The Streets, staging failed escapes in search of Something In The Night, crashing and burning on those spooky Streets Of Fire, all fodder for the Factory, still desperate to believe in The Promised Land. "Mister, I ain't a boy, no, I'm a man", declares Springsteen. It is his first great work of maturity. Everything that Springsteen has achieved since is signposted on this masterful collection.
