---
title: "A Classic Case Of Be Careful What You Wish For"
author: "Peter Ames Carlin"
source: "Bruce"
date: "2013-09-17"
category: "Book Excerpt"
---

A Classic Case Of Be Careful What You Wish For
an excerpt from "BRUCE" by Peter Ames Carlin

THE CRITICAL APPRAISALS GREETING BORN TO RUN read like news accounts of the second coming. "The purest glimpse of the passion and power of rock 'n' roll in nearly a decade", sang the Los Angeles Times ' Robert Hilburn. Which sounded pretty good until you read the thoughts of the New York Times ' chief music critic, John Rockwell: "Mr. Springsteen's gifts are so powerful and so diverse that it's difficult even to try to describe them in a short space . .

. you owe it to yourself to buy this record." Pick up Rolling Stone , and there came Greil Marcus, one rock critic who could score a few points against Landau in an intellectual knife fight, declaring Born to Run "a magnificent album that pays off on every bet ever placed on [Springsteen]." At Creem the review came from the nicotine- yellow fingers of Lester Bangs, the gonzo critic whose acidic pen could reduce overblown music and musicians into a foul- smelling puddle. But while Bangs acknowledged the whiff of Barnum in Columbia's publicity campaign ("one of the biggest hypes in recent memory"), his enthusiasm for the music itself overwhelmed everything else. "Bruce Springsteen is an American archetype, and Born to Run will probably be the finest record released this year", Bangs wrote. And there was more: "In a time of squalor and belittled desire, Springsteen's music is majestic and passionate with no apologies ...[and] we can soar with him, enjoying the heady rush of another gifted urchin cruising at the peak of his powers and feeling his oats as he gets it right, that chord, and the last word ever on a hoodlum's nirvana."

As the momentum behind Born to Run strengthened, so did the tidal conclusion that the album, like Bruce himself, was nothing short of heroic: God's gift to the culturally blighted 1970s. Which put the New Dylan business to shame and added that much more momentum to the skepticism of writers and critics who didn't have an ear for Bruce's music but did have an eye for the magical blend of hype and herd mentality. And what could anyone make of the many connections between the über- critic circuit and Springsteen's already incestuous inner circle? Any observant reader of rock magazines and other youth culture journals would recognize Landau's name from his many reviews and columns, and from his record review editor title at Rolling Stone . And while the reader might not guess that Marcus and Landau were longtime friends— and that the former had in fact recommended the latter for his editorship— she could undoubtedly entertain herself wondering if Marcus's personal and professional bonds to Landau (his titular editor at Rolling Stone ) might have influenced his enthusiasm for Born to Run . And, of course, Landau was also a close friend of the writer Dave Marsh, who had escorted Landau to his first Bruce show in the spring of 1974, introduced the two men, and then encouraged Landau to publish the "I Saw Rock and Roll Future" column at Boston's Real Paper .

It would be more of a leap to suggest that Marsh, who came up through the Detroit- based offices of Creem , had somehow bedazzled Bangs into writing his rave review. But Marsh had also written a glowing profile of Bruce that Creem published the month before Bangs's review ran, which reintroduced the thought of insider groupthink. Either that, or the canniness on the part of a lightly educated New Jersey guitarist who had intuited that any artist who could fuse Bob Dylan's subterranean braininess with Elvis Presley's sexual outrageousness would be the very image of the brainy rock critic's fondest imaginings. So maybe it wasn't difficult to understand what the New York Times ' Henry Edwards meant when he proposed, just after the first wave of Born to Run reviews flooded the media, that "if Bruce Springsteen didn't already exist, the critics would have had to invent him." 1 And there was more to come.

Months after issuing the edict that Bruce would give no print interviews that weren't guaranteed to be a part of a cover story (a bluff move that grew into a necessity when the wave of attention swelled to tidal proportions), Appel got a call from an editor at Newsweek saying that the magazine was ready to commit to putting Bruce on its cover. Both of the nation's leading newsweeklies had already devoted column inches to Bruce, starting with Time magazine's generous coverage of both Greetings and The Wild, the Innocent , while Newsweek ran a midsized, interview- free but largely upbeat 2 feature pegged to Born to Run 's release in late August. This time, however, Newsweek wanted to publish a deeply reported piece. "In those days having an entertainer on the cover was a hallowed bit of ground", says Maureen Orth, the Newsweek writer assigned to write and lead the reporting for the piece. "But [the editors] loved him, and when I saw him perform in Asbury Park I thought, 'Oh my God, he's a great, great performer.'" Still, the buzz coming from sources who had spoken either with Orth or the staff reporters also working the story indicated that Newsweek planned to focus on Bruce less as a dynamic new artist but as the latest in a series of industrially created pop idols.

When Time magazine culture writer Jay Cocks got wind of the Newsweek story- in- progress, what he heard made him think that his competitors were out to trash their subject. A fan of Bruce's first two albums who heard Born to Run as a significant addition to the American rock 'n' roll catalog, Cocks took Newsweek 's plans with two kinds of umbrage: he hated letting the crosstown rivals run away with the Springsteen story, and he especially hated the snide package they were, by all indications, wrapping him in. "I thought it would have been a killing representation of an important American artist", Cocks says. "I thought Time magazine should make a countermove. And I'd always wanted to write about him. Plain and simple." Marching into the office of his editor, Martha Duffy, Cocks explained what Newsweek was up to and pitched his idea of taking them on head- to- head. Duffy got it all immediately and convinced the magazine's top editors to let them go after their own Springsteen cover story. When Orth learned that her crosstown competitors were also on the case she went back to Appel and Bruce to argue that they were making a big mistake. "Bruce wasn't big enough to sustain both covers, given what they meant", she says. "I said, 'You're going to live to regret this.' "

For the editors of the magazines, the dueling stories became a game of chicken. While both recognized the absurdity of putting the same somewhat obscure pop star on their covers in the same week, neither could imagine backing down, particularly when gossip about the dueling stories swept across the media filled canyons of midtown Manhattan. "Pretty outlandish, eh?" Appel says, blue eyes sparkling with glee.

But even as Bruce seemed on track to appear on both of America's leading newsweeklies, the never- ending avalanche of publicity, reviews, and coverage made him feel increasingly queasy. "I used to feel I was always in control"he grumbled to the UK New Musical Express 's Andrew Tyler. "Now I'm not so sure." Talking to Cocks, Bruce said he had no idea what the "commotion" could be about. "I feel like I'm on the outside of all this, even though I know I'm on the inside." When Newsweek 's Orth got her interview, Bruce called his new notoriety a nuisance. " What phenomenon?" he asked. "We're driving around, and we ain't no phenomenon. The hype just gets in the way." And if Bruce thought the Born to Run publicity had already grown to absurd proportions, he was kidding himself. Dated October 27, but available a week earlier, the Time and Newsweek covers hit the country on the same day. Unsurprisingly, the double- barreled magazine coverage created its own moment in the media culture.

Cocks's story in Time , titled "Rock's New Sensation", celebrated his subject's achievements while also sketching his past (in the terms that Bruce chose to reveal it) and the outlines of his daily life. Orth's piece (reported in part by Janet Huck and Peter S. Greenberg), led with a "Making of a Pop Star" headline on the magazine's cover, while the story itself veered between favorable accounts of Bruce's shows and music, and at times caustic analyses provided by New York Times critic Henry Edwards (whose anti- Springsteen essay served as the first critical take in the piece) and by Joe Smith, the president of Columbia's main competitor, Warner Bros. Records. Smith compared Bruce to Elton John and Warners's own James Taylor and found him wanting.

Speaking now, Orth says her only intent was to write an accurate portrayal. "I felt like I needed to report the story out", she says. "It's balanced, just not worshipful." If she was blowing the lid off of anything, Orth continues, it was the star- making machinery— from Columbia's publicity offices to Mike Appel— that she saw as manipulating and twisting a young musician whose work she really did believe in. "I was finding out stuff that made me think that this kid was getting batted around. An innocent kid who was shy and maybe not so sophisticated at that point. Who was thinking of Bruce?"

Still, the Newsweek story ended by comparing Bruce to Coca- Cola as another heavily advertised product his customers called the Real Thing— Coke's central advertising slogan at the time. Cocks and Time focused on "Thunder Road" 's notion that there really was magic in the night, and for a lot of fans, no matter their reasons, Bruce was it. If other people worried about what the stories said, Bruce was too busy fretting that their existence would mark the precise point where his music, reputation, and soul would be consumed by the spotlight. At first he kicked himself, furious that he'd let himself become just another celebrity. "He was worried fame was evil", Stephen Appel says.

"He saw it ruin peoples' lives. People lost themselves in their own caricatures." So while Mike Appel savored his promotional triumph, and the E Street Band guys reveled in what all the attention could mean for their group's future, Bruce simmered in his hotel room in Los Angeles. "That was beyond anything anyone could have wished for", Steve Van Zandt says. "And he was pissed! But I was laughing. I thought it was fun." So did Garry Tallent, who first glimpsed the magazines while dashing through the Dallas airport to make a flight to the band's next show. But the bassist had another thought too: "It was a classic case of be careful what you wish for ." Bruce passed the magazines' publication day playing pinball with Columbia promotions man Ron Oberman in an American Legion bowling alley and then shooting pool at the home of former CBS executive Frank Shargo. Back in New York, some members of the publicity team at his record company were beginning to think their new star might not be wrong about the caustic risks of overexposure. "When we first had the record in our hands, I remember saying, "It's time to step up!

We gotta break down walls!'" says label publicist Ron McCarrell. "So we got a little carried away." That realization came a few weeks after some of Bruce's most fervent supporters sensed the possibility of a backlash. A&R man Michael Pillot had tried to slow things down somewhere between the Bottom Line shows and the record's release, only to learn that publicity campaigns work like rocket ships. Once they launch there's no going back. "The answer was, 'Nope'," Pillot recalls. "They said, 'You wanted it to move, right? Now it's moving.'"

So while Bruce stalked Los Angeles like Hamlet- in- reverse, fretting endlessly over the wisdom of actions he had already taken, another, less public part of himself confronted the fact that he had not surrendered to all the publicity as much as he'd actively fueled it. "I could not have been on those covers if I didn't want to", Bruce told the writer Bill Flanagan in 1992. "I didn't have to do those interviews. I remember sitting in a room saying, 'Gee, do I want to do this? It seems scary.' But I [didn't] want to be sitting on my porch when I'm sixty saying, ' Oh, I shoulda, I coulda, I woulda! ' Hey! You got one ride. So I said, 'Let's go!'" The first thing the Time and Newsweek covers achieved was to force Bruce out of the bungalow he'd been renting in Long Branch since the spring of 1974. A tiny, foundationless structure tucked between the large family homes on the block, the once easily overlooked house was now a magnet for the new crowd of fans whose determination to find their quarry overwhelmed whatever respect they might have for an ordinary person's privacy. Flushed out of that house— so quickly, in fact, that he abandoned the spinet piano upon which he'd composed so much of Born to Run 3 Bruce rented a more remote house on a wooded hill in Atlantic Highlands. Quite a bit less glamourous than what you'd imagine a rock star's house might be, but it did offer a nice view of Sandy Hook Bay, and an extra bedroom for newly hired road manager Rick Seguso to stay in when the band took a few nights or weeks off. The record itself sold remarkably well, even accounting for the hype, eventually reaching number 3 on the Billboard album chart, en route to selling more than seven hundred thousand copies by the end of a year (a significant achievement in 1975), and far more than that as the months and years passed. And though the "Born to Run" single stalled at #29 on the singles chart, the song served as a hugely effective calling card to record store owners and radio programmers, and became a guaranteed crowd killer in concert.

Beyond that, the success of Born to Run did little to alter the day- to- day existences of anyone in or working for Bruce and the E Street Band. Yes, the touring vehicles evolved from cramped Ford club vans, to a surplus Red Bank city bus retrofitted with rickety metal- framed bunks, to an actual touring bus. But the entourage still slept in cheap hotels (when they didn't sleep on the moving bus), subsisted largely on truck stop food, and received no happy surprises in their weekly paychecks. "It's nice to have a hit record", Tallent says. "But we were thinking, 'It doesn't feel like we have a hit record. It still feels like we're destitute.'" It also didn't feel like the entire nation had been swept up in Springsteen mania. For while CBS's publicity department had grown quite generous with its financial support for tour advertising, radio outreach, and so on, Bruce remained a stranger in most of the American South, Midwest, and the West coast. In some corners of the nation, the promoters could pay little more than the $2,500 the band had commanded for shows in early 1974. But no matter where he played, or to how many people, his shows had grown even more explosive than before, due both to the excitement generated by the new album and Bruce's overwhelming fear that he'd wind up being a one- hit wonder. Most nights he absorbed all of his fears and anxieties and transformed them into the rocket fuel he needed to catapult himself over the footlights and into the empty air above the crowd. Sometimes the pressure curdled his blood and left Bruce seething. Occasional defects in the sound system, particularly high- decibel blasts of feedback, inspired amp- kicking fits of outrage. Food could also become a serious point of contention, as in the New Orleans visit where road manager Rick Seguso shook up the menu at the postshow family- style dinners they all shared by replacing the usual order for fried chicken with chicken cordon bleu, one of the local caterer's specialties. Most of the gang cheered having something new on the menu. But when a feedback- frazzled Bruce sat down for his meal, he gazed dubiously at the sauce- drizzled, ham- and- cheese stuffed chicken breast on his plate, took a tiny bite, and then dropped his plastic utensils on his paper plate.

"What's this shit?" he hissed. Seguso explained about the caterer, the culinary joys of New Orleans, and so on, but the musician glared back. "Well, I hate it!" At this, the road manager gestured around the table. "Nobody else is complaining." Bruce reached down, picked up his chicken, and hurled it at Seguso. "Then you eat it!" he roared, storming out of the room, down the hall, and, presumably, to the nearest Kentucky Fried Chicken outlet. "I just said, 'Holy shit!'" Seguso remembers. "And everybody else was looking at me and going. ' Oooooohhhh !'" "I think Bruce was under a lot of pressure", Tallent says. "But he sure does have a hell of a right hand for a chicken cordon bleu."

The pressure became even more pronounced in mid- November when Bruce and the band— all making their first journeys outside North America— jetted to England for a weeklong microtour to prime the pump for the full European tour set tentatively for the first half of 1976. The first stop, at London's Hammersmith Odeon theater, would obviously be the most important show of the week. As Bruce's official London premiere, it would be his chance to break through to the city's cultural establishment: a prickly circle of critics and tastemakers who reserved their greatest scorn for Americans who buzzed into town thinking they had something to offer that the city of the Beatles, the Rolling Stones, and David Bowie somehow lacked. That Bruce and the E Street Band had such a distinctly American look and sound only added to the challenge. And when Bruce arrived at the venue, only to find the marquee aglow with a sign reading, "Finally, London Is Ready for Bruce Springsteen and the E Street Band", the publicitysinged musician flipped. The thick papering of "I Have Seen Rock and Roll Future..." signs and stickers on London walls upped his frustration all the more, and when he got to the theater and found the lobby and seats festooned with miniature "Finally, London Is Ready for..."

signs, he erupted. Bruce ran from sign to sign, ripping them down, reducing them to shreds, and scattering the evidence like so much confetti. The memory of the show traveled across the next three decades as a story about a disaster; the collision of a rattled artist with an aggressively unimpressed audience. It certainly didn't help that Bruce spent much of the show with a thick wool cap pulled down tight over his forehead and sometimes over his eyes. But as a much- subsequently released video and live album made clear, the first Hammersmith show wasn't anything close to a disaster. When the lights dimmed, Bruce stepped out to an excited ovation that became a rapt hush when he performed the voice, piano, and glockenspiel arrangement of "Thunder Road." From there, "Tenth Avenue Freeze- Out" electrified the room with its playful funk, while the unadorned piano intro for the less- known Greetings album track "Lost in the Flood" earned an excited burst of applause. So maybe the crowd didn't have the electric charge of the ones Bruce had been facing in the United States. And yes, the quiet moments just before "The E Street Shuffle" invited one angry Cockney to cry out " Oi! Turn the guitar up! "

Obviously, some observers enjoyed it more than others. Vivien Goldman, writing for the British paper Sounds , clocked the show as somewhere between "very, very good" and "so- so", concluding: "the burden of being ordered to take London by storm proved too much for his slender shoulders." Somewhere else in the crowd, Monty Python's Flying Circus member Michael Palin agreed with a friend that "We came expecting the Messiah but got Billy Graham instead."

Still, the shows in Stockholm and Amsterdam came off well, and the week- concluding return to the Hammersmith Odeon rocked harder and to greater acclaim than the opener a few days earlier. Still, Bruce and the band came home feeling beaten up. "We had four shows, got sandblasted, and scooted home", Bruce says. But maybe he and everyone else had been too unsettled by their surroundings to see straight. "You're dealing with men who had never been anywhere", he says. "We couldn't find any cheeseburgers! Europe in 1975 was very European. So we ran back and didn't go back for six years.

That wasn't by mistake." Back in the USA, Bruce and the band celebrated the end of the Born to Run tour, and everything else they had achieved in 1975, with five nights of shows at the 3,119- capacity Tower Theater just outside Philadelphia. All of the performances sold out quickly, with the heaviest demand tilting toward the final show on New Year's Eve. With more than 90,000 requests flooding in for the 15,000 available tickets, an obvious question loomed: Why not admit that the band had grown too big for the city's theaters and start booking Bruce in to Philadelphia's Spectrum arena? The building could hold more than 18,000 for a rock concert, and given the size of the demand, Bruce could fill the basketball arena four, probably five times. And with cash flow still a perpetual problem, when they went begging for crowds in at least half the country (the Born to Run tour had actually lost money), why resist the opportunity for a big score when it came up? Because Bruce wouldn't even consider it. Especially not at the end of 1975. He'd compromised something with the packaging and selling of Born to Run. That had been a survival move— recall the desperation of the post Wild, the Innocent era. But here's the thing: it hadn't required him to alter a note of his music. He'd even held firm when Columbia tried to insist on having a pop radio–friendly short edit of the "Born to Run" single. And when it came to his actual connection to the world— the precious moments when he could look into the eyes of the people, expose his deepest feelings, and feel their energy flowing back into him— there could be no compromise. No echo- chamber sound, no fans stuck out on the upper decks miles away from the heart of the moment. That, Bruce assured anyone who asked, was not going to happen. Ever. A brave stand. And yet it also put Bruce at odds with himself. Having worked so hard to project his art and vision to as wide an audience as possible, refusing to play bigger halls meant that he was also putting himself beyond the reach of a significant percentage of his fans. And if he really wanted to put on the most powerful shows in rock 'n' roll, that meant having the best band, sound, lights, and crew in the industry. All of whom deserved to be paid for their work, just as Bruce would be paid for his when the royalties from Born to Run rolled in.

None of that could happen unless they opened the tent wide enough to welcome the crowds Bruce had invited in by making his breakthrough album. "It's a problem", Appel admitted to the writer John Rockwell that fall. So maybe they could find a way to play Madison Square Garden without surrendering completely to its concrete- and- steel ambiance. They could, perhaps, hang a curtain to both eliminate the echo and block off the most far- flung sections. That was an option, anyway; something they'd work out in 1976, once they figured out what to do with the live recordings Appel had commissioned on the fall tour, thinking that the best way to leverage Born to Run 's success would be to release a multidisc live album showcasing Bruce's exalted performances while also exposing his new fans to the wonders they'd missed on the first two albums. Bruce still hadn't decided whether he was up for that, but he wanted to listen to the tapes before he made up his mind. Landau, while not an official member of the organization, wasn't shy about telling Bruce that he thought it was a terrible idea.

But the competing opinions on the live album mattered far less than who had them, and why, and what they would do to assert their authority over what happened next. In the end, it always comes down to the contracts. Appel's three agreements with Bruce, all five- year commitments, were headed into their fifth year. The manager- producer had long ago promised to reduce his percentages once Bruce broke through to the mainstream, and obviously that time had arrived. But Landau had arrived first. And once Bruce told him that neither he nor a lawyer in his employ had ever taken a serious look at Appel's contracts, Landau urged him to get it done as soon as possible. Bruce did, and emerged from the process rent by surprise, confusion, and anger. Appel, he now realized, had taken control of everything that mattered: his money, his songs, his recording career, everything. And despite the promises his manager had made about fixing their contracts when Bruce became successful, that hadn't happened yet and wouldn't, it seemed, until Bruce agreed to extend Appel's contracts into the future. When a still- unhappy Bruce said that he was no longer entirely certain that he'd be renewing any of their contracts, Appel came forth with another surprise: he had, in his role as publisher, negotiated with Columbia/CBS to receive a $500,000 advance on the coming Born to Run royalties. The company had approved the loan instantly, and now all the money was secured in one of Laurel Canyon Ltd.'s corporate accounts. Appel assured Bruce that he would get his contractually guaranteed fifty percent of the money even if he didn't extend his contracts. But if he agreed to sign the new contracts, he'd get 75 percent of the money. If he didn't, Appel, and Bruce, would be forced to live by the far more tightfisted terms of the contract they both signed back in 1972. Call it pop music business as usual. But that made it a sharp kick in the ribs for Bruce, because it had never been business as usual between Bruce and Appel. From the moment they had shaken hands in the winter of 1972, they had been crusaders, soldiers on a march to glory.

Contracts say whatever contracts say, but as far as Bruce knew, or cared, handshakes and the promises they symbolized meant more. Or so he had believed.

But as the spotlight followed him onto the stage of the Tower Theater on the night of December 31, Bruce didn't know what to believe in anymore. Except for the one thing that had always worked for him: plugging in his guitar, turning it up loud, and hurling himself into the music. Coming out in his usual jeans and leather jacket, with a long, multicolored scarf draped around his neck, Bruce gaped for a moment at his band, who had surprised him by dressing in matching white tuxedos, and then launched into a searing, full- tilt "Night."

After a quick nod to the band's fancy dress— "These guys look so sharp"— he counted off a starry- eyed, slow- dance arrangement of "Tenth Avenue Freeze- Out" before diving back into the charmed swamps of "Spirit in the Night."

Next, Bruce indulged in a quick between- song nod to recent glories ("Seasons come, seasons go, ya get your picture on the cover of Time and Newsweek , but the bus never stops") and then led into an even more juiced than usual "Does This Bus Stop at 82nd Street?", ending with an exultant capper to the image of the girl throwing a rose to the lucky young matador: "and that's me! " Then came something unfamiliar: an extended piano intro, a series of dark chords accompanied by ghostly wails from the sax and guitar, emphasized on occasion with a slithering cymbal roll. Bruce stepped to the microphone and spoke, his voice flat and grim. I used to live in this, uh, two- family house on the main street in town. And at night my father, he'd lock up the front door so the kids had to come through the back door, y'know. And he'd be sittin', he'd sit all the time in the kitchen. He'd turn out all the lights in the house, and he'd just sit there. He did that for as long as I can remember, y'know, until they moved away ...From there he described the late- night talks with his father. Finding Doug sitting alone at the kitchen table, the room lit only by the glow of his cigarette and the alcohol- and- burnt- tobacco haze in his breath, his asking Bruce to sit down and talk, and then his awkward attempt to gird his stymied paternal love with something useful: a peek into the cruelty of his own adult life, the need for mature men to put away their fantasies and brace for the worst life had to offer. Then he'd start screamin' at me, and I'd start ...I'd start screaming back at him, and he'd be tellin' me all the time what a bad world it was. And I'd be tellin' him that it was my life.

Then he started to sing the opening lines of the Animals' "It's My Life"slowed down to draw out the tension in the verses before bursting into explosive full- band choruses. "I'm gonna make it for certain", he sang through gritted teeth. "I'm breakin' loose!" The story of his father, his family, and his childhood, all the old terrors now tangled in his devolving relationship with Appel, in the consuming fear that everything he'd worked for, everything he'd achieved despite Doug's insistence that it could never come true, all of it was now vanishing before his eyes. Except for that he wouldn't let that happen, and so now he screamed it at the top of his lungs, with the entire theater riveted to his every word. It's my life, and I'll do what I want! He slashed at his guitar, his muscles coiled and tense, the veins in his neck taut and unyielding as he bellowed one last thing. Don't...

push me!"
