---
title: "Full Max Interview Report of 11.17.13"
author: "Tom Cunningham"
source: "105.7 The Hawk"
date: "2013-11-26"
category: "Interview"
---

On Sunday night, November 17, 2013, for the benefit of the Middletown Arts Center, Max sat for a nearly two-hour long interview with Tom Cunningham of 105.7 The Hawk and Bruce Brunch, followed by his fielding audience questions and then a subsequent VIP meet and greet. This author was fortunate to experience all and it was an informative, intimate and entirely memorable night for sure.

In attendance were: the Mayor of Middletown, Gerard P. Scharfenberger, PhD; his lovely wife and the President of the Middletown Township Arts Council, Geraldine "Gerry" Scharfenberger; Executive Director Maggie O'Brien and State Senator Joe Kyrillos of the 13th Legislative District and his son, Max, who Max Weinberg praised for his local young band, the Stone Bullets during the questions period.

**Rare Insights and Details**

Weinberg, trim and tanned, polished and poised, shared details with an audience of over 100 attendees. Some details had never before been revealed.

One such revelation was that the E Street Band was indeed the band that played on the recording of not just Talk to Me but also Hearts of Stone on the seminal Jukes album Hearts of Stone. "Now it can be told!" Max proclaimed. Yet another few comments that made audience members gasp were that Prove It All Night was inspired by Abba songs like Dancing Queen and the band was listening to "alot of Barry White" for Candy's Room.

Yet another not widely known detail was the previously unknown working song title Bodo Rocker (short for "Bo Diddley"), never released but known as Going Back. Max still has the tape and used to play it all the time for his wife, Becky. Max effusively described the roaring rocker as "one of the greatest things the E Street Band ever recorded and Garry Tallent, in particular, is a genius on this". This song appeared to hold an even higher place in Max's personal pantheon of favorite songs that he believed he had "nailed", including Roulette, Candy's Room, Ramrod and Born in the U.S.A. The rapt audience was treated to some drumming of the Roulette pattern on the arm of the chair as Max briefly demonstrated his well-known, rattle-gun drum pattern.

Max also recalled the breathlessly swift second studio recording being the final take of the title track of Born in the USA, with an entire jamming sequence removed from the released version. He described a very organic and intuitive jam resulting from a barebones description by Bruce about what he wanted. One by one they wandered into the studio, first with the organ figure, then with Garry joining in and so on.

Max further confirmed the E Street Band recorded an entire electric version of the Nebraska album in two weeks. He joked that Columbia Records really wanted a follow up to Hungry Heart and instead, "Bruce hands in an album with a title track about a serial killer!" The band had recorded great electric versions of all the album's songs but Bruce thought the versions were too distant, in Bruce's mind, because they lacked that critical intimacy that he described as the closeness that you only can get playing on a porch for another listener.

Cramming a lifetime into two hours was a challenge but well done during the interview, which clearly he and Cunningham had worked on to have it slow smoothly.

Married to Becky since 1981 for 37 years, powering Bruce's E Street Band from 1974 until today with a ten year hiatus that was "incredibly important" to the band. Max led the Max Weinberg 7 for Conan for 17 years.

His power and force have been more than an anchor for the band; he's been the engine for the E Street Band, propelling them since Born to Run, catapulting them into come-back ferocity in 1999 and bringing the power, "hour after hour"

until this very day, with dates remaining in Australia, South Africa and concluding, said Max, in Auckland, New Zealand on March 2, 2014 – and then a break -- for now. No mention was made of the upcoming release of the new disc and rumored further dates.

**Right Now**

"We've done over 150 concerts with 5 more, we'll stop for a bit", Max began the interview. Although clearly fit and healthy, Max revealed that he has had 7 hand operations, 2 unsuccessful back operations, and a 2010 open-heart procedure.

Recently, while in Brazil on September 21st, playing the Rock in Rio Festival in Rio de Janeiro, Max read a few newspaper articles from back home that discussed describing his involvement with a local storm-damaged trail near his home. At the November 17th appearance, Max took the opportunity to set the record straight, providing a rich geographical history of the Atlantic Highlands, as well as a polished explanation of the law and facts behind the truth that no one was suing anyone and the community was simply worried about a precarious trail after two hurricanes. The stories skewed the story as Rock Star vs. County.

Although he's traveled around the world with Bruce, Max has shown a loyalty and dedication to our New Jersey since he was a boy and that dedication exists until this very day. Max is the only other member of the band that's remained a Monmouth County resident besides Bruce and Patty. Even his present struggles to ensure the Bay Shore Trail does not suffer catastrophic damage plays into his devotion to New Jersey as a citizen and as a lifelong resident. His appearance to generate some revenue for the Middletown Township Arts Council and their fine facility also was proof positive of the musician giving back.

**Do Look Back Before the Big Top**

Max started the interview by sharing a sort of home movie made up of still and snippets of his days as a boy drummer in New Jersey, primarily showing old photos. He was always the leader of those teen bands, playing everywhere from dances to strip joints. The film had one song playing in the background: Wild Billy's Circus Story, as Max narrated. It concluded with Max revealing that the day he got the gig with the E Street band, he felt the same as the boy did at the end of the song:

And the circus boss leans over and whispers into the little boy's ear Hey, son, you want to try the big top?

Max is as rooted to his sense of place here in Monmouth County with the same genuine connectedness as Springsteen. Max's wife Becky, who he married in 1981, saw Bruce play long before she knew Max, going to teen dances at a place called the Teendezvous (thanks Bumb!) on the corner of Sycamore and Route 35 in Shrewsbury. Max had grown up in South Orange and Newark, while spending most of his adult life in the Atlantic Highlands and Middletown areas of Monmouth County, with his kids attending Red Bank Regional and Rumson Fair Haven Regional. Though he tours the world, Max has remained true to his roots and rooted to his home.

**Bruce Years**

The Calling

Max detailed his now famous audition for the E Street Band in August, 1974\.

Max was living with his parents and playing in the orchestra pit of the Broadway musical "Godspell".

When Max answered the "no Jr. Ginger Baker" ad in the Village Voice upon recommendations of fellow drummer friends who had tried out and failed, he only brought his snare, a bass drum and a high hat, dragging it up 4 floors to the audition on that steamy summer's day. What caught his eye in the ad?

"Columbia Records recording artist". Apparently this band was doing something right.

Max did not want to send any kind of message by just bringing a barebones drum kit, but a number of drummers brought huge sets and none were selected – only Max was. So, one infers, it must have struck a nerve with Bruce. Although Max did not say as much, it is this humble sense of service, this soul-deep devotion to the band above all that revealed itself to Bruce from that first jam and to this day, Max has consistently been more than an accompanist.

Perhaps to take a term of art from architecture, he's been a load-bearing member of this house of rock.

He told the audience about when he entered the rehearsal space for the audition, "...[t]he guitar player approached me and it was Bruce, saying '[h]ey – let's play". Max described how his own focus while playing has always been on "where the action is" on stage – which in the E Street Band, is Bruce Springsteen.

**Synergy**

Time and again, that synergy and connection came up. The focus clicked at the 1974 audition, where Bruce stopped the band stone cold dead on a New York dime and Max intuitively nailed that. Max knew he won the audition when the band and he all stopped cold on Bruce's unexpected command. (Although Max did not mention it, it has been said that song was Let the Four Winds Blow). Even at the recent Jimmy Fallon performance of E Street Shuffle in March 2012, Max had to find Bruce in the crowd of the audience and a crowd comprised of two bands of musicians to lock in on when Bruce was going to end the song. He never takes his eyes of Bruce. He never forgets a song.

The E Street Shuffle performance in particular (<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7SVY43TbibY>) illustrated the pandemonium, the sheer sense of exuberant community that Bruce brings to every performance.

Max described how in television, to expect the unexpected, the camera crew tells one another to 'stay wide'. They did that night. No one that night knew Bruce would invite the entire audience onto the stage.

**The Boys on the Bus**

Max poignantly described the original band members, including the now our sadly departed but never forgotten Clarence "Big Man"/"Master of the Universe"

Clemons and "Phantom Dan" Federici, as the "boys on the bus".

Travel accommodations were endured and then evolved. "We started with Garry Talent's '65 Chevy with a U-Haul and then an Econoliner van and then a GMC motor home – I shared a bunk with Danny. Bruce and Clarence had their own bunks. Then we got the bus – the 1976 Coast Cities bus and we outfitted it with army cots". He described their years "growing up" touring on that bus, reflecting on the heavy weight of the loss of Danny and Clarence, as well as Terry McGovern, Bruce's long time right-hand man since those innocent times.

"It's a huge hole", he said, "but you honor their presence...[t]here's not a night we don't remember them."

Other concert moments Max recounted included the Rising tour, where the band could see the faces of the crowd revealing the deep emotion and sad pain of a post-9/11 world. He reconfirmed the story of two young fans who saw Bruce at a stoplight at the Rumson Bridge into Sea Bright, imploring Bruce "we need you now". He described the manic organization of Kevin Buell to this day under the stage with hundreds upon hundreds of songs organized on the off chance an audience sign would be selected by Bruce and the E Street Band had to snap into action.

**Jay**

Max spoke with great pride about his son Jay, also a drummer in his own right.

Max was in his car with Jay when Jay "got the call" from Bruce around the time of the 2009 Super Bowl performance. He heard Jay take the call, erupting in a eureka epiphany response of a profanity-prefaced 'YEAH!" Jay recounted to Max that Bruce had said, "you may have heard I have this band. And in this band I just happen to have the world's greatest rock and roll drummer but he has a scheduling conflict. Would you like to help us out?"

Jay spent weeks in the barn on Max's property playing to Bruce's records, complete with a list of 100 songs Bruce had given him to practice. Max then gave Jay the greatest hits of Sam and Dave and told him if he learned that, he'd know all there was to know about playing Bruce Springsteen's music.

Indeed, later, when Jay got shocked by Bruce's calling out Back In Your Arms in Stockholm, Steve yelled out to Jay: "Sam and Dave! Sam and Dave!" That was all he needed to know.

In that rock and roll baptism of spontaneous fire, son shared his father Max's driving motivation when an audience member's sign for a requested surprise song is suddenly thrust upon the band: "fear is a great motivator – fear that you play it right".

Jay exceeded Bruce's expectations, blurring the lines between father and son.

Once, Bruce turned to Max after a show on the Wrecking Ball Tour and complemented him on the excellent groove they had hit on the rarely played Back in Your Arms on a prior night in Stockholm. Max stared. He paused and then gently corrected Bruce – "I didn't play on that".

Indeed, it was Jay. That was the Sam and Dave night...

Max's pride for his son was palpable through his stories about him, including remembering the first time he saw Jay play Born to Run at Giant's Stadium and a video caught Max with a beaming smile and a tear in his eye. Apparently Jay and Bruce had "cooked it up" without Max knowing and that made it an even better experience.

Max is no less proud of Ali, his daughter, a classically trained pianist who won a 2005 Monmouth County Teen Arts Festival, being selected to represent Red Bank Regional's best, beating out 2000 other students from 23 participating schools. She's played Glory Days on stage and in fact, played accordion at the final European date on July 28, 2013 in Kilkenny, County Cork, Ireland. But, Max added wryly, Ali could not simply show up with an accordion and expect to jam – especially in a band where nearly everyone plays accordion. "First, you have to be asked!"

**Outside E Street**

Clearly, Max's chops as a drummer got him asked to play time and again above and beyond his main love of the E Street Band. Perhaps the longest such example was the fact that Max headed up the Max Weinberg 7 for 17 years with Conan. Max described himself as "the guy who was willing to do anything for a laugh" and conceded the sharp contrast from the serious intensity he had projected as a rock and roll drummer for so long with the goofy and silly humor of O'Brien's show.

Max and his wife also have a passion for buying and selling real estate. Max told one story about just that passion.

When Max was the bandleader for the short lived Tonight Show with Conan O'Brien, Max and Becky couldn't decide on a home to buy in California. So they bought and sold five or so homes, always renting. Finally they bought a home.

Max's queasiness about the permanency of the gig was over and he told his wife – "It's the Tonight Show? What could happen?"

Nearly immediately after the purchase of that home, however, Conan's tenure with the Tonight Show met its nine-month end. Max's comment is now preserved forever, proudly displayed on a brass plaque, with his name as the quote's author, in his office – a gift from his lovely wife who did not shy away from reminding Max of his less-than-stellar gift for prognostication: "It's the Tonight Show? What could happen?"

It is not surprising given that the power of the legacy of the Max Weinberg is living in the eternal now, eyes never off Bruce, mind never off the music, body never not in motion.

As for advice for young drummers, Max said time and again that his role and that of a good drummer was as an accompanist. Quoting Frank Lloyd Wright's comment that "the beauty of a building is the space between the walls", Max added: "music is the space between the notes".

This lack of rock star ego and devotion to the band is classic Max: to play your role full throttle, but as part of a community on stage for the good of people around you, the same as you would do in your family and in the community in which you live.

An audience member asked whether the motivation to play was any different today with financial success than it had been when Max was young, unknown and struggling. Max remembered Sinatra being asked a similar question, with his struggling period referred to as "$50 dates". Frank said "they're all $50 dates". Max said since the beginning, it's never been about the compensation but it's been about that feeling for music that, as Bruce says, runs "soul deep". "It's not just your job to show up and play but show up and play great".

Max also echoed Bruce's comments in recent years, about a new found relaxed efficiency born from years of hard work. Max described the later recording sessions with Brendan O'Brien as being relaxed and reasonable. Max could fly in for the weekend, work from noon to 6 p.m. each day, and return home. Gone were the days of sturm und drang of the early years.

**Setting the Record Straight on Preserving Bayshore Trail**

During the November 17th interview, Max relished the opportunity to share his passion for music and the musicians he has spent a lifetime with, but he also wanted to clear up another issue that meant so much to him. In doing so, Max revealed a side of himself that would have made his father proud.

Some recent newspaper articles had miscast him as a self-interested interloping "rock star" "threatening" Atlantic Highlands with a "lawsuit" to stop construction on a beloved local Bayshore Trail. This is not true.

To explain, Max at one point momentarily rushed offstage to grab a lectern to discuss this issue, begging the indulgence of the audience. He initially did so tongue in cheek but as he spoke with ever increasing articulate conviction, it was clear – very clear – that Max was setting the record straight and for good reason.

Max comes from a rich tradition of attorneys in his family, most especially his father, Bertram Weinberg. One could see the measured, rational polish of the son of a litigator rise up in Max as he patiently, good-naturedly defined all the facts and issues.

The issue is simple: articles incorrectly portrayed Max as having "threatened suit", stalling finalization of the repair of the Bayshore Trail. Max Weinberg is not the kind of man that would throw his weight around to ensure his own private advantage and he did not have to tell the audience that; the facts show that.

The truth is that he and "many many" other homeowners – including the sitting municipal court judge of the same town (also a resident) filed a Title 59 "notice of claim" to meet the 90 day deadline. This is not a lawsuit. This only means if and only if it would be necessary to bring suit against the State, the many homeowners, including Max, would have preserved their right to do so.

Despite the headlines trumpeting the incorrect notion that "lawsuits" stalled construction, those same newspaper articles reported that the reasons underlying stalled but not abandoned construction included officials not identifying funding and officials having to secure permits from the Department of Environment Protection.

Max stressed that everyone wants the trail open but the critical issue is performing construction work on the trail that would not jeopardize the stability of trail itself, which, if it collapses, could cost a great deal to repair (not to mention endanger lives if someone were to be on the trail as it convulsed and collapsed). This was a community issue – not far removed in spirit from a "band thing". Bruce has said it and Max was implying it: no wins unless we all win.

The claim was made under the N.J.S.A. §59:1-1 et seq which is the Title 59 Claims Against Public Entities. The statute's policy is to protect and enforce sovereign immunity - you can't sue the king – the state is in most instances immune from suit. Ever heard of the phrase "you can't fight City Hall?" Well, you can't sue them either or enjoin them to act, except under these very narrow statutory requirements.

Filing a Title 59 claim is not suing anyone. It's preserving your right to proceed against the State, whether it would be the town or whether it would be any governmental entity, in the event of disaster and damage.

Max enlightened the audience as to just how vulnerable the trail and areas are. Max vividly described the geological phenomena known as "slumping", a real worry for the community and the reason for all the homeowners preserving claims (but not lawsuits). A slump is a sudden failure of a slope resulting in a very deep landslide.

This means, when sufficient damage is done to the hills near his home and others' homes in Atlantic Highlands, the very earth could shear away and, like jello on a plate that reaches a tipping point, that earth could slide away in a catastrophic collapse. One of his homes in the 1970's did just that and lost 35 feet of yard due to such a calamity.

Max summed up: "Storm damage, natural progressive erosion is one thing.

Manmade problems caused by overaggressive excavation and clear-cutting of native vegetation that grows along the shoreline is another issue. That's what this is all about."

He directed our attention to a fascinating and informative United States Geological Society report called the [Minard Report](http://pubs.usgs.gov/pp/0898/report.pdf), also on the Atlantic Highlands website, encouraging the audience to read it as well.

Max's humble appreciation behind his being given the opportunity to explain his concerns about his being miscast as a "rock star" suing people was both genuine and refreshing in an age of mega-rich ego driven publicity junkies with no sense of community and no sense of respect for those around them. The same devotion to community Max has shown on stage after stage, night after night, he brought home to the audience in his hometown of Middletown that Sunday night of November 17th, showing his devotion to the land, homes and properties around him in his community.

**Humble Giant**

Max's father was a lawyer and Max has said that his father thought the law was sacred and meant to help people. Max has adopted that same reverence for music that his father had for the law. Both the law and music, at their best, change lives profoundly for the better.

A force of nature behind the drums for nearly 40 years, Max spent the evening praising his family, his community, Bruce, the E Street Band and others. Max said he was lucky enough to join forces with one of the greatest bandleaders and showmen, as well as one of the greatest rock and roll songwriters, of the 20th Century.

However, the unspoken truth is Bruce Springsteen and the E Street Band have one of the greatest rock and roll drummers of all time and one of the most faithful, dedicated band members any band could ever hope to have. It's a band thing.

Max is not simply what he humbly described himself as – an accompanist whose eye was always on where the action was on stage.

Rather, Max is and has always been the action engine of the E Street Band, the propulsive rhythm turbine of the Max Weinberg 7 and of any band he ever plays with.

It can be said that a man is only so mighty as his character, talent and dedication allow. If that is true, than surely a rock and roll band is only so mighty as its drummer and the E Street Band is proof of that.

If a man does not keep pace with his companions, perhaps it is because he hears a different drummer. Let him step to the music which he hears, however measured or far away.

Henry David Thoreau

Note: link leads to 404
PHOTOS: <http://jamiebodophoto.smugmug.com/Max/n-P57dd>
