---
title: "A New Biography Of The Boss"
author: "Steve Morse"
source: "Boston Globe"
date: "1985-11-30"
category: "Book Review"
---

As if Bruce Springsteen needed any more publicity, there's a new book chronicling his career. Thankfully, it is not a quick-hit attempt at exploitation, but was written by Los Angeles Times rock critic Robert Hilburn.

He is a thoroughbred Springsteen-lover who has seen him perform several dozen times and driven up to 400 miles to catch a single show.

Simply titled "Springsteen" (Rolling Stone Press, New York, 256 pp., $29.95), the book is laden with outstanding color photos and an articulate analysis of Springsteen's workaholic devotion to his craft. As Springsteen says forcefully to Hilburn: "Rock 'n' roll is a promise, an oath. It's about being as true as you can at any particular moment."

Son of a bus driver, Springsteen grew up next to a gas station in Freehold, N.J. He was so dedicated to music, Hilburn writes, that he played an $18 pawnshop guitar in his room for hours, avoided girls and sports, and even missed his high school graduation. Fittingly, in his first group he used to sing the Who's "My Generation", the Magna Carta of rock songs.

The book is written in a refined style - minus the sweat of Dave Marsh's biography, "Born to Run" - but the critiques of the music are first-rate.

Springsteen's last few years are given short shrift (the pressure of deadlines?), but his early years are sharply rendered. The definitive Springsteen bio is yet to be written, but this is handsomely done.
