---
title: "Benefits Of Being The Boss, Springsteen Poised To Get Ok For Fenway"
author: "Scott S Greenberger"
source: "Boston Globe"
date: "2003-06-24"
category: "News"
---

Your average Bruce Springsteen fan just "ain't that young anymore", a demographic fact that appears to make a huge difference to Boston officials and residents who are willing - if not eager - to welcome Springsteen to Fenway Park.

After a surprisingly placid City Hall hearing yesterday, municipal officials are poised to grant permission for the New Jersey rocker to play Fenway Park on Sept. 6 and 7. Only a few Fenway neighborhood residents showed up to express concern about the shows, and most of them said they were comfortable with the concert idea, as long as the Red Sox don't make it a habit.

"Different artists pull in different crowds", the head of the city's licensing board, Patricia Malone, said - somewhat less poetically than the Boss did in the 1975 lament to fleeting youth, "Thunder Road." "You think of a more mature, older kind of educated crowd that attends a Bruce Springsteen concert, compared to a number of groups I can think of."

If Springsteen does get clearance to play at Fenway, he will go where performers such as Sir Paul McCartney and Seiji Ozawa could not: Concerned over damage to the field, the former owners of the Red Sox turned down McCartney's request to play at the ballpark in the early 1990s, and last summer the Boston Symphony Orchestra said Ozawa's wish to conduct a farewell concert at Fenway would cost the orchestra too much.

The rock band Smash Mouth played its hit song, "All Star" during the 1999 All- Star Week festivities at Fenway, and in 2000 there was a brief musical performance to cap off a seven-month youth outreach by the Archdiocese of Boston. But the last full-fledged concert at Fenway Park was in 1973, when about 15,000 people per day attended a two-day relocated Newport Jazz Festival performance, featuring Ray Charles and Stevie Wonder.

"This is the first time it's a real stadium rock show event", Red Sox vice president Larry Cancro said of the proposed Springsteen concerts.

Cancro said Springsteen approached the team about including Fenway Park on a tour of major league parks, not the other way around, and that he doesn't expect the nearly century-old ballyard to turn into a regular concert venue.

He said the team's new owners will make "good side money" by hosting the Boss (he wouldn't say exactly how much) but that concerts wouldn't generate enough money to influence the owners' thinking on whether to remain at Fenway Park, mostly because the team's schedule wouldn't allow them to hold concerts very often.

Winning a city license for the shows appears likely. Patricia Malone, who presided over yesterday's meeting, said, "You would be hard-pressed after that hearing to say that public safety and order will be adversely affected by this concert on these nights."

Malone has 30 days to decide whether to allow the concerts, but she hopes to issue a ruling before the end of the week. Although the Red Sox asked permission to hold two concerts, the second will be held only if the Sept. 6 concert is a sellout, as expected.

Malone cautioned, however, that she might place a limit on attendance to a number below the typical Red Sox game sellout, about 36,000. She also might force the Sunday, Sept. 7, concert to end by 10 p.m., possibly pushing up the start time.

The Red Sox would like to close Yawkey Way for the concert, as they do for home baseball games, but Malone reacted coldly to that idea. The team would have to go through a separate licensing process to get permission for the street closing.

While the Fenway and Brookline residents who showed up at the hearing didn't oppose the concerts outright, they did express concern about the noise, which will be more constant than the cheering (or jeering) that emanates from a typical Red Sox game.

"Is this amplification going to be done by some 'roadie' from this rock group, or by the Red Sox?" said Richard Orareo, a 30-year resident of the Fenway.

"When the Red Sox play the national anthem, I stand up in my living room. I don't want to hear Bruce Springsteen in my living room."

Cancro said Springsteen's crew, not the Red Sox, will take care of the sound equipment. He noted that the team has cut a special deal for its hard-core fans, persuading the Boss and his handlers to hold a "presale" of tickets to Red Sox season ticket holders, although details have not yet been worked out.

Tickets for the general public go on sale Friday at 10 a.m. through Ticketmaster or at the Orpheum Theatre box office.

If the ticket prices on Springsteen's current tour are any indication - he lands at Gillette Stadium in Foxborough on Aug. 1 and 2 - they will cost about $75.
