---
title: "At Last, Springsteen Springs Back Into Rock - And With A Passion"
author: "Steve Morse"
source: "Boston Globe"
date: "1984-06-10"
category: "Album Review"
---

Last year there was no word from Bruce Springsteen. He didn't release any music, nor did he tour. He made a cameo appearance in a video by his saxophonist Clarence Clemons, but otherwise was hidden away in various recording studios while David Bowie, Michael Jackson, the Police and Boy George shared the limelight.

Springsteen, however, is returning dramatically. He has just released his most blistering uptempo album in years, "Born in the U.S.A.", a blunt but instantly likable record that reaffirms his standing as the leader and conscience of American rock 'n' roll.

Many American rockers such as Huey Lewis, Cyndi Lauper and Van Halen have shunned social issues and plunged into droll escapism. Springsteen, who has never forgotten the restlessness of his youth in the working-class town of Asbury Park, N.J., instead hits the listener square in the eyes with his latest progress report on the American Dream.

Despite the title "Born in the U.S.A." Springsteen is anything but a rah- rah patriot as he scans the lingering woes of the Vietnam war and the smoldering resentment of dead-end kids who raise hell because they fear the future. The title cut itself is a despairing tale of an unemployed Vietnam veteran who lost his brother in the war and never regained a purpose.

Springsteen's music has been modified to match the times - the songs have been shortened from his earlier suites and synthesizers are now used more than saxes - but the burning idealism and faith in romantic love that has always fueled his music remains undimmed. As he sings in "No Surrender", a brisk rocker with a popping drum sound:

_I want to sleep beneath peaceful skies in my lover's bed with a wide open country in my eyes and these romantic dreams in my head._

The song picks up where Springsteen left off in his last band album, 1980's "The River", in which he sang, "Alone buddy there ain't no peace of mind/That's why I'll keep searching till I find my special one."

That search takes Springsteen into the soul of America on the new album. He describes a smitten highway worker who falls in love with an underage girl but pays a heavy price ("Working on the Highway"); a laid-off lumberman who loses his mind when his lover leaves him ("Downbound Train"); and an aging father who wants to move away and start a new life with his wife and child in another town ("My Hometown").

There are many lost, hard-luck characters on the album, but they're portrayed with the kind of dignity usually applicable to country music, not rock. It is a dignity that has been carried over from his 1982 solo acoustic album, "Nebraska", which also probed the underbelly of the American Dream and showed echoes of Woody Guthrie and Hank Williams.

"Nebraska" was judged as too downbeat for significant radio airplay, and so might "Born in the U.S.A." were it judged strictly by some of the lyrics, especially in today's climate of brainless, inoffensive radio fare. But Springsteen circumvents that problem by wrapping his lyrics in joyous rock 'n' roll, forcing the songs to be heard.

Throughout the album, he smoothly integrates contemporary and traditional musical influences. "Darlington County", about two cocky New York kids who are out for pleasure with a big wad of money in their wallets, has a euphoric R&B feel and could easily fit on the Stones' "Exile on Main Street." Another tune, "Working on the Highway", is indebted to traditionalist Lee Dorsey's "Working in the Coal Mine", and the chorus sounds a little like Dorsey but at double the speed.

Contemporary influences also abound. The album's new single, "Dancing in the Dark", has a dance-conscious synthesizer track played by the E Street Band's Roy Bittan. Some fans have grouched that the song sounds like a Rick Springfield hit due to its Top 40 simplicity and sanded-down vocal from Springsteen. It is perhaps the weakest cut on the album.

As for other in-vogue touches, Springsteen makes use of hand- clapping tracks, though he again proves how impossible he is to categorize by adding some coyote-like vocal moans on "I'm on Fire" that indicate that not only have his ears been perked to popular radio but also to hoary country songs from the '30s.

A dramatic highlight of the album is Springsteen's guitar playing. He plays most of his own leads on the album, from ripping blues riffs to filigree background lines. His longtime guitarist, Miami Steve Van Zandt, who has left the E Street Band for a solo career, is credited only with acoustic guitar and mandolin.

The most mysterious aspect of the album, however, is the reduced role of saxophonist Clemons. Once the focal point of Springsteen's sound - dating back to his early '70s beginnings - he rarely rises above an occasional horn squawk and bellow. His near disappearance is the album's only serious letdown.

Otherwise, "Born in the U.S.A." has the most vitality Springsteen has shown since his 1975 album, "Born to Run." His commitment to rock 'n' roll is undiminished, and so, for that matter, is his love of America in spite of its flaws. While taking note of the country's turmoil and squashed dreams, he nevertheless is not above boasting, "I'm a cool rocking Daddy in the U.S.A."
