---
title: "Where's The Boss? Springsteen Misses A Beat In Anthology"
author: "Steve Morse"
source: "Boston Globe"
date: "1989-01-31"
category: "Video Review"
---

Bruce Springsteen has missed a golden opportunity.

His much-anticipated "Video Anthology: 1978-1988", which comes out today at a cost of $24.98, just doesn't go far enough. It may please the average fan with its collection of MTV video singles and a couple of new concert clips, but the more serious fan can expect to be frustrated.

Why aren't there more rarities? In its 100-minute length, there may be 15 minutes of never-before-seen footage. Why not more early footage, or something from a rehearsal or from backstage or from outtakes -- anything to spark the set and make it seem more than a video laundry list with little or no involvement from Springsteen.

How about some concert footage of his famous "Devil with a Blue Dress" medley?

And why not add a short interview to make the anthology more special? Or some words from the band? Many other long-form videos -- by everyone from Aerosmith to Lynyrd Skynyrd -- include some personal remarks. Here was a chance for Springsteen to address the issue of video itself -- and how comfortable, or uncomfortable, he's felt in making conceptual videos for MTV.

Absent is the passion that went into 1986's five-record anthology, "Live: 1975-1985." One sensed that many concert tapes were pored over for that project -- and the results went much further in pleasing a true Springsteen fan.

The new video anthology, however, feels like a rush job without nearly the same care. Springsteen has worked hard on every project he's been associated with, but this seems an exception.

In all fairness, video has never been Springsteen's forte. He has never extended the boundaries of video in the way that David Bowie, Peter Gabriel or the Talking Heads have.

Like many rockers of his generation, he looks shy and awkward when asked to be an actor. In the 1985 clip of "I'm on Fire" (one of five "Born in the USA" videos in the new anthology), he struggles to play a car mechanic who services a beautiful woman's Thunderbird, then fantasizes about loving her. He could be auditioning for the role of Benny Sago on the soap opera "All My Children."

Then in 1988's "One Step Up", he plays a hard-luck guy who turns up in a striptease club, staring blankly ahead. Neither clip is going to win any Oscars.

Knowing his limits, Springsteen has made sure that most of his MTV videos have either been concert clips or included concert action spliced in with the acting. "Glory Days" is a good example. Directed by well-known filmmaker John Sayles, it combines footage of a fun-filled club gig in Hoboken, N.J., with a reflective scene of Bruce playing baseball with a young boy (who's supposed to be his son) while factories loom in the background.

The best of the video clips, not surprisingly, focus on stage performance.

"Born in the USA", in which his E Street Band is at full acceleration, comes from the Los Angeles Sports Arena in 1984. "The River" and "Thunder Road", two classics from the '70s, are from the "No Nukes" film made at Madison Square Garden in 1979. And "War", the Edwin Starr cover song, is from a Los Angeles Coliseum show in 1985. It is the identical performance that's on the "Live: 1975-1985" album, complete with the antiwar rap about how "blind faith in your leaders will get you killed."

The only true rarity is a clip from a 1978 Phoenix concert of "Rosalita", in which a skinny, frizzy-haired Springsteen looks so different from the muscle- bound figure of today.

The two other teasers for hard-core fans are concert videos that have been available only in Europe. They're both from his last tour -- "Spare Parts", a volcanic track from a Sheffield, England, concert; and a subdued solo acoustic treatment of his once freewheeling anthem, "Born to Run."

Unfortunately, the serious fan won't be satiated by these few morsels.

Springsteen would have been better served by releasing a long-form concert video -- perhaps a follow-up to his live-album anthology. Or, at the very least, he could have added more rare footage or more clips of songs that weren't hit singles. The Boss appears to have let someone else take control of this project -- and the results aren't up to his high standards.
