---
title: "Bruce Looks Back Springsteen Talks About Life, Changes, And His New Box Set"
author: "Steve Morse"
source: "Boston Globe"
date: "1998-11-20"
category: "Interview"
---

Many young artists look at the fickle pop scene and figure they'll be lucky to put out one album, maybe two, before the corporate ax falls. That's not an attitude to spark creativity -- and it's not an attitude that was ever shared by Bruce Springsteen, for whom music has been a fervent calling since he emerged from the New Jersey Shore in the early '70s.

"From the beginning, I imagined I would have a long work life", he says. "I didn't know if it would be a successful one, or what the stages would be, but I always saw myself as a lifetime musician and songwriter. I was always concerned with writing to my age at a particular moment. That was the way I would keep faith with the audience that supported me as I went along."

Springsteen, 49, has kept that faith with a new boxed set, "Tracks", which skillfully collects 56 previously unissued songs that not only show how prolific he's been in the last quarter-century, but how he's matured from fun- loving, bar-band innocent to worldly poet/philosopher whose recent appointment to the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame was well-earned.

"I always wanted my music to influence the life you were living emotionally -- with your family, your lover, your wife, and, at a certain point, with your children. So I aspired to write across a wide range of topics. I guess the only map I followed was what I found myself going through in my own life"Springsteen says from his home in New Jersey. (He moved back from Los Angeles, but he kept his home there.) The four-CD box moves from his early folk-rock, Dylan-inspired days (including his solo audition for Columbia talent scout John Hammond), through the evolution of his E Street Band into a sleek, R & B-influenced machine, to his most recent, post-E Street decade of exploring introspective domestic issues, often in sparse musical settings.

"It was like an alternate career", Springsteen says of the box. "When I listened to the whole thing, it was like another slightly abbreviated, but completely alternate, body of work that I felt had really stood the test of time."

Much of it also restores the fun to his career. In recent years (and to some extent, since he began), he has accented his serious side, especially on the most recent studio CD, "The Ghost of Tom Joad", a scarifying, Steinbeckian look at a soured American dream. That led to a solo tour that was artfully conceived, but almost morose, in the opinion of some fans.

The new box, though, helped Springsteen "get back to the fun of a rock band.

It connected me with singing loud and playing loud again, which is something I've always loved doing. It was a big change from 'Tom Joad.' " Return to the party Springsteen's party side is back in force on the new box, which is filled with high-flying rock tunes that were left off previous discs because they didn't fit the mood.

"In the past, some of the songs that were the most fun, and the most entertaining and rocking, fell by the wayside because I was concerned with what I was going to say and how I was going to say it", he admits. "I write in the liner notes that the reason some got left off was just contextual. Like, the songs 'Give the Girl a Kiss' and 'So Young and in Love' just wouldn't have fit onto {the album} 'Darkness on the Edge of Town' at the time, but they were fun bar- band rockers."

Springsteen didn't anguish, however, about filing them away.

"As you're working along, everything you've done remains an ongoing and open project", he says. "I never felt like, even when I didn't use these songs, they were going to be gone or lost forever. I felt there would be a moment when I released them. I just didn't know it would be this far down the road."

The 56 previously unreleased tracks were actually whittled down from 200-plus songs that Springsteen had in the vaults. He took what he felt were the best and had them remixed.

"We had three studios going", he recalls of the process. "I had a {sound} truck in my yard, I had a studio in the house, and then I had {mixing engineer} Bob Clearmountain calling me on the phone from California."

He also solicited the opinions of his former E Street Band members, who stopped by his home to hear songs they may not have heard in 10 to 20 years.

"I'd run things by them that we were working on at the time, and it was fun hearing their responses", says Springsteen.

E Street drummer Max Weinberg would stop by the most, following his gig on "The Conan O'Brien Show." He and keyboardist Roy Bittan were later additions to the E Street Band, helping modernize its sound in the late '70s and '80s.

"When Max and Roy got into the picture, they formalized the structure in a certain way, which is what I was looking for", says Springsteen. "I was looking for something that would streamline the sound with people who had a wide range of playing styles, as Max did. He found the place where Keith Moon and Bernard Purdie intersected. Sometimes we played like the Who and sometimes we played like an R & B band. And you needed somebody who felt completely comfortable covering both places.

"When you get into the second CD {on the box}, that's when we really learned how to record the band in the studio dynamically for the first time. On those sessions for 'The River' album -- when Stevie Van Zandt came in and joined the production team -- we were committed to capturing some of that excitement. You hear the band tightening and there was a sort of very contained chaos on songs like 'Roulette', 'Dollhouse', and 'Where the Bands Are.' The band was playing with tremendous energy, but within a formal arrangement and the tension that's created. The level of playing is some of my favorite on the whole {box}. It was a great moment -- and a moment when the band realized itself on another level.

"And that carries over to the time of {the 1984 album} 'Born in the USA' with a song like 'Lion's Den.' I should have put that out! Why didn't I put that out? It sounds like a hit now. The band is playing great and the horns come in and it has a great chorus. It was just too much fun to put out, I guess."

Childhood influence In those years, Springsteen was also trying to distance himself from his working-class father, who had an enormous impact on his values.

"In the early years, I found a voice that was my voice and also partly my father's voice. But isn't that what you always do? Why do kids at 5 years old go into the closet and put their daddy's shoes on? Hey, my kids do it"Springsteen says of the three children he's had with his wife, Patti Scialfa.

"They run in the car and they come out clunking along with your boots on. And I think that was part of what I was doing. It was the fuel and fire for a lot of songs, particularly on 'Darkness' and 'The River.' It's always been a central connection. Then you go beyond it and find your own life.

"So as I look through the boxed set, it provides you with records that could have been. But it also fills out all those records in a certain way and helps articulate a little {more clearly} the connections that I was trying to make."

During the interview, Springsteen heaps praise on the E Street Band, which included saxophonist Clarence Clemons, organist Danny Federici, and guitarist Nils Lofgren. There have been rumors of a reunion tour to back the boxed set (Stevie Nicks and Steve Miller have both done boxed-set tours in recent years), but Springsteen is reluctant to commit now.

"I'll dodge the question as best I can", he says with a laugh. "I don't have any concrete tour plans at the moment, but I've talked to the guys and, actually, I've talked to all the guys, going back years. The relationships have all sustained. I had some of the greatest nights of my life onstage with them. I can't imagine at some point that we wouldn't do it again."

In the meantime, Springsteen is writing again. He reportedly has nearly completed a hip-hop album and a country album, but isn't sure if he'll put either one out.

"I'm a synthesist. I'm always making music. And I make a lot of different kinds of music all the time. Some of it gets finished and some of it doesn't"he says. "I found a gray area that actually works very well for me. I tell myself I'm not making a record and then I feel free to do anything, no matter how bad or good it might be. And then I wake up one morning and go, 'I have a record!' I've used that mental state a lot since {the 1982 disc} 'Nebraska."

That's when I really didn't think I was making a record, yet I made one of my favorite records and it had some of my best writing.

"I'd like to have another record out by the end of the century, which isn't that far away", he says. "But I don't know where I'm going to take it at this particular moment."
