---
title: "Springsteen's Nebraska': Too New For Radio?"
author: "Jim Sullivan"
source: "Boston Globe"
date: "1983-01-09"
category: "Commentary"
---

Any rock fan with an FM radio on last fall heard songs from the new Bruce Springsteen album, "Nebraska." It was Springsteen's first album without backing from his group, the E Street Band, and the highly anticipated record took off in a flash.

You probably haven't heard any of those songs recently. Airplay on the album - a critical favorite which made numerous year-end Top 10 lists - has pretty much petered out. And if it weren't for his stature - Springsteen is arguably America's most popular singer and songwriter - chances are excellent you wouldn't have heard the record at all.

The key to an album's success rests very much with FM rock radio airplay. The "Nebraska" situation - its immediate embrace and then its relatively quick fade - calls into question radio's role. What posture does radio take in relation to music that may be worthy and innovative, but does not accede to conventional, commercial rock standards? Can vital music with rough edges gain a place in a radio world resistant to noncomformity? Did Springsteen succeed, albeit in a limited fashion, only because of his track record?

Recorded on a relatively unsophisticated 4-track recorder, "Nebraska" was a sharp departure from Springsteen's usual sound and style. Springsteen is known for his spirited songs of adventure and hope: Think of "Born to Run", his 1975 breakthrough song and album: Cruising down highways and backstreets searching for "the runaway American dream" as shimmering electric guitar chords reverberated behind him. He often found redemption - either on the road or in the power of love. He offered dreams that were worth clinging onto and the E Street Band backed those sentiments with melodic muscle.

Springsteen took a different road on "Nebraska", a road he began to travel on his two previous albums, "Darkness on the Edge of Town" and "The River." There he started to discover a darker side to the dreams. Lives started to become claustrophobic or tear apart at the seams. Springsteen could still drive to "Cadillac Ranch", dance the night away with "Sherry Darling", or declare love in "Two Hearts." But more and more he seemed to be saying that those were just escape clauses. Sometimes those streets turned mean.

On "Nebraska" the streets turned not only mean, but desolate. The bleak stories unfold one after another - drunken tragedy, unemployment, bad luck, cold factories, final prayers - and late- night drives that lead not to adventure, but to nowhere fast. The plea made in "Open All Night" \- "rock 'n"

roll, deliver me from nowhere" - is never answered. "Nebraska" is a very lonely record.

"Nebraska" has done well in the marketplace, selling over 800,000 copies.

Columbia Records, reportedly worried at first, expects it to have no trouble going platinum (selling a million copies).

There haven't been many "rock" records like "Nebraska." Its closest cousin is Neil Young's "Tonight's the Night", a downbeat, edgy record that followed his biggest hit "Harvest."

On "Nebraska" Springsteen employed voice, simple acoustic guitar, harmonica and a bit of spare synthesizer, taking the road Bob Dylan and Hank Williams had taken many years before. It's heartfelt and moving, but there's little relief from the grim, melancholic tone.

This is not the stuff radio hits are made of these days; it can be the stuff of excellent, demanding music.

Springsteen had his reputation working overwhelmingly in his favor. "You're listening to it and you know you're listening to Bruce Springsteen", says Columbia Records senior vice president, Al Teller. "You candraw on his background as an artist of great honesty and sincerity." Still, the sound was rough and ragged, flat and underproduced by contemporary standards.

Imagine the predicament of radio program directors: An artist as popular as anyone with an album as unconventional as anything on the market. Do we take the chance?

American radio said yes - up to a point.

"As concerned as the label seemed to be before the fact", says Bill Hard, editor of the respected FM radio journal Friday Morning Quarterback, "it got a lot of airplay. It was a personal favorite of a lot of programmers. It was quickly added and the initial audience response was very positive."

But Hard says "Nebraska" didn't have a long radio shelf life. "On intensity, I'd rate it an A minus", says Hard. "On duration, a C minus. It didn't have enough song depth for album stations. It was too down-tempo."

On the average Hard says the album was played about seven weeks. Satisfactory, but hardly ranking with other popular releases such as the Clash's "Combat Rock" and Men at Work's self-titled debut (27 weeks), A Flock of Seagulls debut (31 weeks) or, somewhat ironically, "American Fool", the breakthrough album by Springsteen sound-alike John Cougar (33 weeks).

Still, it made a dent - this personal, acoustic record made in a high- tech, electronic age.

Could the Springsteen record signal a breakthrough, open up the doors for more risky records? Or, put another way, if "Nebraska" had come across a program director's desk without Bruce Springsteen's name on it, would it have stood a chance?

"Forget it", says Hard. "I can guarantee that."

"Probably not", says Andy Beaubien, program director of Boston's WCOZ-FM. "I don't think we would have paid much attention to it."

"Someone else would not get any attention at all", agrees Oedipus, program director for the competing WBCN-FM. "The demand is just not there. Personal, introspective albums are nice, but the artist has really got to be saying something, or you've got to know who the artist is."

Hard suggests "Nebraska" presented many programmers with an opportunity to freshen up their staid hard-rock sound. Yet, he says candidly, "It was a chance to step away from the standard format, but to do it safely." In many markets, Hard says, programmers would congratulate themselves on taking a "risk."

Boston, however, is a different situation. "Boston's always been a musically active market", Hard states. "In Boston it's not quite as big a deal."

Indeed, WBCN and WCOZ, Boston's main album rock stations, jumped on the record immediately. WBCN's Oedipus says he saw it mainly as a Springsteen- without- the-backup-band album, not that far removed from "The River." "It's not particularly radical", Oedipus says. "He could have gone even further."

But, in line with the national reaction, neither station stayed with the record very long. WCOZ played it heavily for two or three weeks, says Beaubien, before airplay dropped off. WBCN went longer, about seven weeks, before airplay waned.

"I love the album personally", says Beaubien. "I was listening to it at home the other day and I like it more and more every time I hear it. But it clashes with a lot of the stuff on radio. It doesn't fit well."

Oedipus: "Only somebody like Bruce Springsteen could get away with that."

Beaubien: "He knew he could get away with it, and I'm glad he did it."

Valid points. But the larger issue deals not so much with acoustic music in hard-rock formats, but, simply, with different music in conservative radio formats. Although slight changes are occurring - more new, provocative music is getting played now than it was a year ago - radio is far more prone to play reliable, formulaic rock than innovative new music. "It's a fact of life"says Columbia's Teller. "The mechanism is axiomatically slow to change."

And so, for the most part, the shackles on rock 'n' roll's growth remain. The constraints on the term "popular music" are intact.

This question hangs: If a new Bob Dylan did come along - an artist who was socially stirring and musically stimulating, but different sounding - would you hear him on the airwaves?
