---
title: "Not Seeing Bruce"
author: "Diane White"
source: "Boston Globe"
date: "1988-02-27"
category: "Commentary"
---

I feel I must add my voice to the mounting hysteria that surrounds Bruce Springsteen's four-month concert tour of America.

I have been reading the febrile testimonies of those who saw him once across a crowded room in Teaneck, who have thrown themselves upon concert stages to touch the hem of his garment, who have been rendered speechless in his divine presence. It occurs to me that I am one among a small and ever-shrinking minority of people who have never met The Boss, who have never even seen him in person, whose lives, in fact, might be said to be defined by our lack of contact with Bruce Springsteen.

How well I remember the first time I didn't see Bruce. It was 1973, and he was playing a small club in Boston. Some friends were going to see him and asked me to come along, but I decided to stay home and wash my hair instead.

Looking back, I see it was a decision that has shaped the course of my life, but, incredibly, it didn't seem all that important at the time. The following day one of my friends called and said, "I have just seen the future of rock 'n' roll, a totally brilliant, unique, soon-to-be-giant artist who will transform the face of popular music as we know it, a man who just might be the next Mick Jagger."

I had seen the first Mick Jagger and, frankly, couldn't see the need for another one. But this was not the last I was to hear of the man who has been called a legend in his own time, a charismatic genius, a musical evangelist of The American Way, etc.

It wasn't long before I didn't see Bruce again. It was 1974, and this time he was in Boston playing a large concert hall. Even then, people were clamoring for tickets. I would have clamored, too, if I'd known then what I know now, but that's hindsight for you.

My friend attended the concert and called me the next day with a report.

"Forget what I said about Bruce being the next Mick Jagger", she said. "He is the rock messiah."

Naturally I felt that I must see him or die in the attempt. But it was not to be. My hopes rose, briefly, in late 1977, when a man I was involved with told me he had tickets to see The Great One. Imagine my disappointment when The Great One turned out to be Barry Manilow, not Bruce. The years flew by and not once did I ever see Bruce. I sure heard about him a lot, though, and once, in Los Angeles, I ate in a FatBurger he'd eaten in only the week before. So near and yet so far!

In 1985, when he made his last big tour, tickets were impossible to come by.

There was even a rumor that Bruce was having trouble getting tickets to see himself, that's how popular he'd become.

A local radio station was awarding tickets to people with the most heart- wrenching stories. The competition was keen. People were presenting notarized proof of terminal illness, others were willing to hand over their children in exchange for a pair of tickets to see Bruce. Who would blame them?

I felt my story was as sad as anyone's. I had never seen Bruce in person, I had never seen him perform. My obsession dated back a dozen years. But there were even more pathetic stories. I lost to another woman who'd been not seeing him since 1969, when she just missed him performing on a flatbed truck in Wheeling, W. Va.

Looking back, I can see that not seeing Bruce is probably the great tragedy of my life. But I will just have to accept it. There are moments when it's not easy. This morning, for example, I turned on the radio and heard a report on last night's concert in Worcester. A fan screamed, "Bruce is God! Bruce is God!"

It caused me to reflect that perhaps my fate is to be a rock 'n' roll martyr, never to see Bruce, never to meet him, but to demonstrate my faith by accepting the testimony of those who have.
