---
title: "Springsteen Annihilates No Nukes'"
author: "Bruce McCabe"
source: "Boston Globe"
date: "1980-08-16"
category: "Film Review"
---

A concert film on behalf of the anti-nuclear energy movement, starring Jackson Browne, Crosby, Stills & Nash, the Doobie Brothers, John Hall, Bonnie Raitt, Gil Scott-Heron, Carly Simon, Bruce Springsteen, James Taylor, Jesse Colin Young and others. At the Exeter Street Theater. Rated PG.

If "No Nukes" were as good as its climax - a devastating performance by Bruce Springsteen - it might be memorable.

As it is, it's an uneven sub-genre, what might be called the political concert film. It's an edited version of the five anti- nuclear energy concerts that were staged last September in New York. The concerts concluded with an outdoor rally at Battery Park that drew over 250,000, what the filmmakers describe as the largest anti- nuclear energy rally to date.

The film concludes with the cameras panning the monstrous crowd at Battery Park. That shot is more powerful than any other statement in the film about nuclear power.

But "No Nukes" must stand and fall on its status as a concert film. The problem lies in the performances. Some of the performers, like Springsteen and Jackson Browne, were obviously energized for their feature film debuts. In fact, "No Nukes" is moribund for the opening 20 minutes until Browne launches into "Running On Empty", one of the better metaphorical rock numbers of the age.

It is Springsteen's performance, however, that blows the film apart. He appears to feverish chants of "Bruce", "Bruce", "Bruce" - and proceeds to outstrip every other performer. Looking like the urban back street's answer to Elvis Presley, stalking the stage like a twitchy panther, moaning hoarsely and staring sullenly at his worshippers, Springsteen, accompanied by the E Street Band, flogs himself through "The River", a new song, and the familiar "Thunder Road" and "Quarter To Three."

"I'm 30 years old", he gasps, upon collapsing and being helped to his feet.

"My heart's starting to go on me ...I can't ...I can't ..."

He raises a feeble hand, presumably to still the howling mob before him. His fatigue transforms itself into a malignant narcissism.

"I don't want you to beg", he smiles, the screams pouring over him like molten lava. "I'm just a prisoner of rock 'n' roll." As it happens, Springsteen's bravado is quite in keeping with the spirit of the film's chauvinism. Most of the female performances seem to have wound up on the cutting room floor.

Perhaps the next concert film could support women's liberation.
