---
title: "Springsteen: Nose-To-The-Grindstone Rock - In concert at the Providence Civic Center last night."
author: "Steve Morse"
source: "Boston Globe"
date: "1985-01-24"
category: "Concert Review"
---

The signs of fanaticism weren't hard to spot. There was the black sports car with the New York license plate, "Bruuuuce." And the delirious guys in the back of the stage with the huge unfurled banner, "On the 8th day God created Bruce."

Yes, this was a true meeting of the clan, the society of Bruce Springsteen worshippers who fought tooth and nail to get a ticket and were losing their collective sanity for the night.

The day was straight out of the Twilight Zone - 11 arrests for scalping composed the legal statistics, while the media went totally bonkers, including one hapless reporter for KISS-108 who was reduced to interviewing a hotel worker to discover that Springsteen ate strawberries in the afternoon and that several band members ate croissants.

"What was on the croissants?" she asked. "Jam, I guess", the stunned employee answered.

Springsteen's response to all of this was business as usual. And for Springsteen, that business is pure, nose-to-the-grindstone rock 'n' roll, delivered with dripping sweat pouring out of his blues workshirt with rolled- up sleeves framing newly thickened biceps that aren't to be messed with.

It was no wonder that he said to ear-shattering acclaim, "Man, I hated high school! I'm so glad that when 8 o'clock comes around at night, I get to rock rather than do my homework!"

And rock he did, especially after a surprisingly pensive first set full of down-tempo tristesse, ballads and chilling stories in which he discussed social commitment: "When you say 'I'm an American', that means you have a responsibility about that. And there are a lot of things to be proud of in this country and a lot of things to be ashamed of. It's the things to be ashamed of that we've got to work on."

With that he announced that the audience should go to tables in the lobby and make donations to the Rhode Island Community Food Bank. It was only fitting, too, that this was a lead-in to the reflective "My Hometown", a song of working-class survival.

Springsteen had opened up at full-throttle with the slashing "Born in the USA" as sound from an elephantine layout of 72 speakers detonated through the hall, and tiny guitarist Nils Lofgren pranced about in Kevin McHale's No. 32 Celtics T-shirt, which hung to his knees.

"We're in the middle of a road trip", Springsteen said, blasting through the cocky come-on of "Meet Me in the Street" and the travelling tune, "Darlington County", in which the muscular tank- topped Clarence Clemons finished with a honking sax solo and a gentlemanly drop to one knee.

But then Springsteen struck an introspective mood, challenging the crowd on the acoustic "Johnny 99" (about a laid-off auto plant worker who goes berserk and kills someone), "Atlantic City" (a spiritualized ballad about rebirth) and two new unrecorded songs, "Shut Out the Light" (a ballad about a scarred Vietnam veteran) and "Bye Bye Johnny", which began with an autobiographical story about Springsteen's only visit to Presley's Graceland mansion in Memphis and how he vaulted the metal gates to see if he could meet him.

"Now I consider it a stupid thing to have done because I know I hate it when people do it at my house", he confessed before ending the song with a hoarse, haunting verse from Elvis' epic "Mystery Train."

Springsteen was much more extroverted in his second set, coming out in his own bulging tank top and ripping through "Thunder Road", the sing-along "Cadillac Ranch" (as he lifted his arms and shouted "How sweet it is!" to the crowd's Super Bowl-sized applause) and the crisp "Dancing in the Dark", in which, per custom, he pulled up a female from the front seats and they danced like lost loves.

"Bobbie Jean", a ferocious "Born to Run" (with a "C.C. Ryder" climax), Creedence's "Travelling Man" and the perennial "Devil with a BlueDress" medley stoked the fires further.

The pace at this point was straight, gravity-defying overdrive. Lumped into the stew were golden oldies "I Can't Help Falling in Love With You Again" (another dip into the Presley songbook), "Twist and Shout" (The Isley Brothers soul-dancing standard) and the Dave Clark Five's ageless teen hit, "Do You Love Me", which segued back into "Twist and Shout" and took a few brain cells with it.

The night's clannish fanaticism finally drew to an over-the-top close with the appropriate "I'm Just a Prisoner of Rock 'n' Roll" and a feverish "Ramrod."

Yet Springsteen was still, somehow, able to salt the finale with philosophy.

Summing up his view of music as a healing grace, he noted dramatically, "A lot of the power of rock 'n' roll came from feeling friendship and community. Nobody wins unless everybody wins."

Enough said. So much for this meeting of the Springsteen Society, New England Chapter. It was a beauty.
